.. _ug:cha:80211:

The 802.11 Model
================

.. _ug:sec:80211:overview:

Overview
--------

IEEE 802.11 a.k.a. WiFi is the most widely used and universal wireless
networking standard. Specifications are updated every few years, adding
more features and ever increasing bit rates.

In INET, nodes become WiFi-enabled by adding a :ned:`Ieee80211Interface`
to them. (As mentioned earlier, :ned:`WirelessHost` and :ned:`AdhocHost`
already contain one in their default configuration.) APs are represented
with the :ned:`AccessPoint` node type. WiFi networks require a matching
transmission medium module to be present in the network, which is
usually a :ned:`Ieee80211ScalarRadioMedium`.

Operation mode (infrastructure vs ad hoc) is determined by the
ingredients of the wireless interface. :ned:`Ieee80211Interface` has the
following submodules (incomplete list):

#. *management*: performs association/disassociation with access points,
   channel scanning, beaconing

#. *agent*: initiates actions such as channel scanning and connecting to
   and disconnecting from access points

#. *MAC*: transmits and receives frames according to the IEEE 802.11
   medium access procedure

#. *PHY*: represents the radio

The management component has several implementations which differ in
their role and level of detail:

-  :ned:`Ieee80211MgmtAdhoc`: for ad hoc mode stations

-  :ned:`Ieee80211MgmtSta`, :ned:`Ieee80211MgmtStaSimplified`: for
   infrastructure mode stations

-  :ned:`Ieee80211MgmtAp`, :ned:`Ieee80211MgmtApSimplified`: for access
   points

The “simplified” ones assume that stations are statically associated to
an access point for the entire duration of the simulation (the
scan-authenticate-associate process is not simulated), so they cannot be
used e.g. in experiments involving handover.

:ned:`Ieee80211MgmtSta` is does not take any action by itself, it
requires an agent (:ned:`Ieee80211AgentSta` or a custom one) to initiate
actions.

The following sections examine the above components.

.. _ug:sec:80211:mac:

MAC
---

The :ned:`Ieee80211Mac` module type represents the IEEE 802.11 MAC. The
implementation is entirely based on the standard IEEE 802.11-2012 Part
11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY)
Specifications.

:ned:`Ieee80211Mac` performs transmission of frames according to the
CSMA/CA protocol. It receives data and management frames from the upper
layers, and transmits them.

The :ned:`Ieee80211Mac` was designed to be modular to facilitate
experimenting with new policies, features and algorithms within the MAC
layer. Users can easily replace individual components with their own
implementations. Policies, which most likely to be experimented with,
are extracted into their own modules.

The model has the following replaceable built-in policies:

-  ACK policy

-  RTS/CTS policy

-  Originator and recipient block ACK agreement policies

-  MSDU aggregation policy

-  Fragmentation policy

The new model also separates the following components:

-  Coordination functions

-  Channel access methods

-  MAC data services

-  Aggregation and deaggregation

-  Fragmentation and defragmentation

-  Block ACK agreements and reordering

-  Frame exchange sequences

-  Duplicate removal

-  Rate selection

-  Rate control

-  Protection mechanisms

-  Recovery procedure

-  Contention

-  Frame queues

-  TX/RX

.. _ug:sec:80211:physical-layer:

Physical Layer
--------------

*The physical layer* modules (:ned:`Ieee80211Radio`) deal with modelling
transmission and reception of frames. They model the characteristics of
the radio channel, and determine if a frame was received correctly (that
is, it did not suffer bit errors due to low signal power or interference
in the radio channel). Frames received correctly are passed up to the
MAC.

On the physical layer, one can choose from several radios with different
levels of detail. The various radio types (with the matching
transmission medium types in parentheses) are:

-  :ned:`Ieee80211ScalarRadio` (:ned:`Ieee80211ScalarRadioMedium`)

-  :ned:`Ieee80211DimensionalRadio`
   (:ned:`Ieee80211DimensionalRadioMedium`)

-  :ned:`Ieee80211UnitDiskRadio` (:ned:`UnitDiskRadioMedium`)

.. _ug:sec:80211:management:

Management
----------

*The management layer* exchanges management frames via the MAC with its
peer management entities in other STAs and APs. Beacon, Probe
Request/Response, Authentication, Association Request/Response etc
frames are generated and interpreted by management entities, and
transmitted/received via the MAC layer. During scanning, it is the
management entity that periodically switches channels, and collects
information from received beacons and probe responses.

The management layer has several implementations which differ in their
role (STA/AP/ad-hoc) and level of detail: :ned:`Ieee80211MgmtAdhoc`,
:ned:`Ieee80211MgmtAp`, :ned:`Ieee80211MgmtApSimplified`,
:ned:`Ieee80211MgmtSta`, :ned:`Ieee80211MgmtStaSimplified`. The
..Simplified ones differ from the others in that they do not model the
scan-authenticate-associate process, so they cannot be used in
experiments involving handover.

.. _ug:sec:80211:agent:

Agent
-----

The agent is what instructs the management layer to perform scanning,
authentication and association. The management layer itself just carries
out these commands by performing the scanning, authentication and
association procedures, and reports back the results to the agent.

The agent component is currently only needed with the
:ned:`Ieee80211MgmtSta` module. The managament entities in other NIC
variants do not have as much freedom as to need an agent to control
them.

:ned:`Ieee80211MgmtSta` requires a :ned:`Ieee80211AgentSta` or a custom
agent. By modifying or replacing the agent, one can alter the dynamic
behaviour of STAs in the network, for example implement different
handover strategies.
