.. _ug:cha:802154:

The 802.15.4 Model
==================

.. _ug:sec:802154:overview:

Overview
--------

IEEE 802.15.4 is a technical standard which defines the operation of
low-rate wireless personal area networks (LR-WPANs). IEEE 802.15.4 was
designed for data rates of 250 kbit/s or lower, in order to achieve long
battery life (months or even years) and very low complexity. The
standard specifies the physical layer and media access control.

IEEE 802.15.4 is the basis for the :protocol:`ZigBee`,
:protocol:`ISA100.11a`, :protocol:`WirelessHART`, :protocol:`MiWi`,
:protocol:`SNAP`,and the :protocol:`Thread` specifications, each of
which further extends the standard by developing the upper layers which
are not defined in IEEE 802.15.4. Alternatively, it can be used with
:protocol:`6LoWPAN`, the technology used to deliver IPv6 over WPANs, to
define the upper layers. (Thread is also 6LoWPAN-based.)

The INET Framework contains a basic implementation of IEEE 802.15.4
protocol.

.. _ug:sec:802154:network-interfaces:

Network Interfaces
------------------

There are two network interfaces that differ in the type of radio:

-  :ned:`Ieee802154NarrowbandInterface` is for use with narrowband
   radios

-  :ned:`Ieee802154UwbIrInterface` is for use with the UWB-IR radio

To create a wireless node with a 802.15.4 interface, use a node type
that has a wireless interface, and set the interface type to the
appropriate type. For example, :ned:`WirelessHost` is a node type which
is preconfigured to have one wireless interface, ``wlan[0]``.
``wlan[0]`` is of parametric type, so if you build the network from
:ned:`WirelessHost` nodes, you can configure all of them to use 802.15.4
with the following line in the ini file:



.. code-block:: ini

   **.wlan[0].typename = "Ieee802154NarrowbandInterface"

.. _ug:sec:802154:physical-layer:

Physical Layer
--------------

The IEEE 802.15.4 standard defines several alternative PHYs. There are
several narrowband radios at various frequency bands using various
modulation schemes (DSSS, O-QPSK, MPSK, GFSK BPSK, etc.), a Direct
Sequence ultra-wideband (UWB), and one using chirp spread spectrum
(CSS).

INET provides the following radios:

-  :ned:`Ieee802154NarrowbandScalarRadio` is currently a partially
   parameterized version of the APSK radio. Before using this radio, one
   must check its parameters and make sure that they correspond to the
   specification of the 802.15.4 narrowband PHY to be simulated.

-  :ned:`Ieee802154UwbIrRadio` models the 802.14.5 UWB radio.

One must choose a matching medium model, for example
:ned:`Ieee802154UwbIrRadioMedium` for :ned:`Ieee802154UwbIrRadio`, and
:ned:`Ieee802154NarrowbandScalarRadioMedium` for
:ned:`Ieee802154NarrowbandScalarRadio`.

.. _ug:sec:802154:mac-protocol:

MAC Protocol
------------

The 802.15.4 MAC is based on collision avoidance via CSMA/CA. Important
other features include real-time suitability by reservation of
guaranteed time slots, and integrated support for secure communications.
Devices also include power management functions such as link quality and
energy detection.

The :ned:`Ieee802154Mac` type in INET is currently a parameterized
version of a generic CSMA/CA protocol model with ACK support.

There is also a :ned:`Ieee802154NarrowbandMac`.
