.. _ug:cha:network-interfaces:

Network Interfaces
==================

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:overview:

Overview
--------

In INET simulations, network interface modules are the primary means of
communication between network nodes. They represent the required
combination of software and hardware elements from an operating system
point-of-view.

Network interfaces are implemented with OMNeT++ compound modules that
conform to the :ned:`INetworkInterface` module interface. Network
interfaces can be further categorized as wired and wireless; they
conform to the :ned:`IWiredInterface` and :ned:`IWirelessInterface` NED
types, respectively, which are subtypes of :ned:`INetworkInterface`.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:built-in-network-interfaces:

Built-in Network Interfaces
---------------------------

INET provides pre-assembled network interfaces for several standard
protocols, protocol tunneling, hardware emulation, etc. The following
list gives the most commonly used network interfaces.

-  :ned:`EthernetInterface` represents an :protocol:`Ethernet` interface

-  :ned:`PppInterface` is for wired links using :protocol:`PPP`

-  :ned:`Ieee80211Interface` represents a Wifi (:protocol:`IEEE 802.11`)
   interface

-  :ned:`Ieee802154NarrowbandInterface` and :ned:`Ieee802154UwbIrInterface`
   represent a :protocol:`IEEE 802.15.4` interface

-  :ned:`BMacInterface`, :ned:`LMacInterface`, :ned:`XMacInterface`
   provide low-power wireless sensor MAC protocols along with a simple
   hypothetical PHY protocol

-  :ned:`TunInterface` is a tunneling interface that can be directly
   used by applications

-  :ned:`LoopbackInterface` provides local loopback within the network
   node

-  :ned:`ExtInterface` represents a real-world interface, suitable for
   hardware-in-the-loop simulations

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:anatomy-of-network-interfaces:

Anatomy of Network Interfaces
-----------------------------

Network interfaces in the INET Framework are OMNeT++ compound modules
that contain many more components than just the corresponding layer 2
protocol implementation. Most of these components are optional, i.e.
absent by default, and can be added via configuration.

Typical ingredients are:

-  *Layer 2 protocol implementation*. For some interfaces such as
   :ned:`PppInterface` this is a single module; for others like Ethernet
   and Wifi it consists of separate modules for MAC, LLC, and possibly
   other subcomponents.

-  *PHY model*. Some interfaces also contain separate module(s) that
   implement the physical layer. For example, :ned:`Ieee80211Interface`
   contains a radio module.

-  *Output queue*. This module is optional and absent by default,
   because most MAC protocol implementations already contain an internal
   queue which is more efficient to work with. The possibility to plug
   in an external queue module allows one to experiment with different
   queueing policies and implement QoS, RED, etc.

-  *Traffic conditioners* allow traffic shaping and policing elements to
   be added to the interface, for example to implement a Diffserv
   router.

-  *Hooks* allow extra modules to be inserted in the incoming and
   outgoing paths of packets.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:internal-vs-external-output-queue:

Internal vs External Output Queue
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Network interfaces usually have the external queue module defined with a
parametric type like this:



.. code-block:: ned

   queue: <queueType> like IOutputQueue if queueType != "";

When :par:`queueType` is empty (this is the default), the external queue
module is absent, and the MAC (or equivalent L2) protocol will use its
internal queue object. Conceptually, the internal queue is of inifinite
size, but for better diagnostics one can often specify a hard limit for
the queue length in a module parameter – if this is exceeded, the
simulation stops with an error.

When :par:`queueType` is not empty, it must name a NED type that
implements the :ned:`IOutputQueue` interface. The external queue module
model allows modeling a finite buffer, or implement various queueing
policies for QoS and/or RED.

The most frequently used module type for external queue is
:ned:`DropTailQueue`, a finite-size FIFO that drops overflowing
packets). Other queue types that implement queueing policies can be
created by assembling compound modules from DiffServ components (see
chapter :doc:`ch-diffserv`). An example of such compound
modules is :ned:`DiffservQueue`.

An example ini file fragment that installs drop-tail queues of size 10
on PPP interfaces:



.. code-block:: ini

   **.ppp[*].queueType = "DropTailQueue"
   **.ppp[*].queue.frameCapacity = 10

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:traffic-conditioners:

Traffic Conditioners
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Many network interfaces contain optional traffic conditioner submodules
defined with parametric types, like this:



.. code-block:: ned

   ingressTC: <ingressTCType> like ITrafficConditioner if ingressTCType != "";
   egressTC: <egressTCType> like ITrafficConditioner if egressTCType != "";

Traffic conditioners allow one to implement the policing and shaping
actions of a Diffserv router. They are added to the input or output
packets paths in the network interface. (On the output path they are
added before the queue module.)

Traffic conditioners must implement the :ned:`ITrafficConditioner`
module interface. Traffic conditioners can be assembled from DiffServ
components (see chapter :doc:`ch-diffserv`). There is no
preassembled traffic conditioner in INET, but you can find some in the
example simulations.

An example configuration with fictituous types:

.. code-block:: ini

   **.ppp[*].ingressTCType = "CustomIngressTC"
   **.ppp[*].egressTCType = "CustomEgressTC"

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:hooks:

Hooks
~~~~~

Several network interfaces allow extra modules to be inserted in the
incoming and outgoing paths of packets at the top of the netwok
interface. Hooks are added as a submodule vector with parametric type,
like this:

.. code-block:: ned

   outputHook[numOutputHooks]: <default("Nop")> like IHook if numOutputHooks>0;
   inputHook[numInputHooks]: <default("Nop")> like IHook if numInputHooks>0;

This allows any number of hook modules to be added. The hook modules are
chained in their numeric order.

Modules inserted as hooks may act as probes (for measuring or recording
traffic) or as means of modifying or perturbing the packet flow for
experimentation. Module types implementing the :ned:`IHook` NED
interface include :ned:`ThruputMeter`, :ned:`Delayer`,
:ned:`OrdinalBasedDropper`, and :ned:`OrdinalBasedDuplicator`.

The following ini file fragment inserts two hook modules into the output
paths of PPP interfaces, a delayer and a throughput meter:

.. code-block:: ini

   **.ppp[*].numOutputHooks = 2
   **.ppp[*].outputHook[0].typename = "Delayer"
   **.ppp[*].outputHook[1].typename = "ThruputMeter"
   **.ppp[*].outputHook[0].delay = 3ms

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:the-interface-table:

The Interface Table
-------------------

Network nodes normally contain an :ned:`InterfaceTable` module. The
interface table is a sort of registry of all the network interfaces in
the host. It does not send or receive messages, other modules access it
via C++ function calls. Contents of the interface table can also be
inspected e.g. in Qtenv.

Network interfaces register themselves in the interface table at the
beginning of the simulation. Registration is usually the task of the MAC
(or equivalent) module.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:wired-network-interfaces:

Wired Network Interfaces
------------------------

Wired interfaces have a pair of special purpose OMNeT++ gates which
represent the capability of having an external physical connection to
another network node (e.g. Ethernet port). In order to make wired
communication work, these gates must be connected with special
connections which represent the physical cable between the physical
ports. The connections must use special OMNeT++ channels (e.g.
:ned:`DatarateChannel`) which determine datarate and delay parameters.

Wired network interfaces are compound modules that implement the
:ned:`IWiredInterface` interface. INET has the following wired network
interfaces.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:ppp:

PPP
~~~

Network interfaces for point-to-point links (:ned:`PppInterface`) are
described in chapter :doc:`ch-ppp`. They are typically used
in routers.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:ethernet:

Ethernet
~~~~~~~~

Ethernet interfaces (:ned:`EthernetInterface`), alongside with models of
Ethernet devices such as switches and hubs, are described in chapter
:doc:`ch-ethernet`.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:wireless-network-interfaces:

Wireless Network Interfaces
---------------------------

Wireless interfaces use direct sending [1]_ for communication instead of
links, so their compound modules do not have output gates at the
physical layer, only an input gate dedicated to receiving. Another
difference from the wired case is that wireless interfaces require (and
collaborate with) a *transmission medium* module at the network level.
The medium module represents the shared transmission medium
(electromagnetic field or acoustic medium), is responsible for modeling
physical effects like signal attenuation, and maintains connectivity
information. Also, while wired interfaces can do without explicit
modeling of the physical layer, a PHY module is an indispensable part of
a wireless interface.

Wireless network interfaces are compound modules that implement the
:ned:`IWirelessInterface` interface. In the following sections we give
an overview of the wireless interfaces available in INET.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:generic-wireless-interface:

Generic Wireless Interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ned:`WirelessInterface` compound module is a generic implementation
of :ned:`IWirelessInterface`. In this network interface, the types of
the MAC protocol and the PHY layer (the radio) are parameters:

.. code-block:: ned

   mac: <macType> like IMacProtocol;
   radio: <radioType> like IRadio if radioType != "";

There are specialized versions of :ned:`WirelessInterface` where the MAC
and the radio modules are fixed to a particular value. One example is
:ned:`BMacInterface`, which contains a :ned:`BMac` and an
:ned:`ApskRadio`.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:ieee-80211:

IEEE 802.11
~~~~~~~~~~~

IEEE 802.11 or Wifi network interfaces (:ned:`Ieee80211Interface`),
alongside with models of devices acting as access points (AP), are
covered in chapter :doc:`ch-80211`.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:ieee-802154:

IEEE 802.15.4
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:ned:`Ieee802154NarrowbandInterface` is covered in a separate chapter, see
:doc:`ch-802154`.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:wireless-sensor-networks:

Wireless Sensor Networks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

MAC protocols for wireless sensor networks (WSNs) and the corresponding
network interfaces are covered in chapter
:doc:`ch-sensor-macs`.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:csma/ca:

CSMA/CA
~~~~~~~

:ned:`CsmaCaMac` implements an imaginary CSMA/CA-based MAC protocol with
optional acknowledgements and a retry mechanism. With the appropriate
settings, it can approximate basic 802.11b ad-hoc mode operation.

:ned:`CsmaCaMac` provides a lot of room for experimentation:
acknowledgements can be turned on/off, and operation parameters like
inter-frame gap sizes, backoff behaviour (slot time, minimum and maximum
number of slots), maximum retry count, header and ACK frame sizes, bit
rate, etc. can be configured via NED parameters.

:ned:`CsmaCaInterface` interface is a :ned:`WirelessInterface` with the
MAC type set to :ned:`CsmaCaMac`.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:acking-mac:

Acking MAC
~~~~~~~~~~

Not every simulation requires a detailed simulation of the lower layers.
:ned:`AckingWirelessInterface` is a highly abstracted wireless interface
that offers simplicity for scenarios where Layer 1 and 2 effects can be
completely ignored, for example testing the basic functionality of a
wireless ad-hoc routing protocol.

:ned:`AckingWirelessInterface` is a :ned:`WirelessInterface`
parameterized to contain a unit disk radio (:ned:`UnitDiskRadio`) and a
trivial MAC protocol (:ned:`AckingMac`).

The most important parameter :ned:`UnitDiskRadio` accepts is the
transmission range. When a radio transmits a frame, all other radios
within transmission range are able to receive the frame correctly, and
radios that are out of range will not be affected at all. Interference
modeling (collisions) is optional, and it is recommended to turn it off
with :ned:`AckingMac`.

:ned:`AckingMac` implements a trivial MAC protocol that has packet
encapsulation and decapsulation, but no real medium access procedure.
Frames are simply transmitted on the wireless channel as soon as the
transmitter becomes idle. There is no carrier sense, collision
avoidance, or collison detection. :ned:`AckingMac` also provides an
optional out-of-band acknowledgement mechanism (using C++ function
calls, not actual wirelessly sent frames), which is turned on by
default. There is no retransmission: if the acknowledgement does not
arrive after the first transmission, the MAC gives up and counts the
packet as failed transmission.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:shortcut:

Shortcut
~~~~~~~~

:ned:`ShortcutMac` implements error-free “teleportation” of packets to
the peer MAC entity, with some delay computed from a transmission
duration and a propagation delay. The physical layer is completely
bypassed. The corresponding network interface type,
:ned:`ShortcutInterface`, does not even have a radio model.

:ned:`ShortcutInterface` is useful for modeling wireless networks where
full connectivity is assumed, and Layer 1 and Layer 2 effects can be
completely ignored.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:special-purpose-network-interfaces:

Special-Purpose Network Interfaces
----------------------------------

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:tunnelling:

Tunnelling
~~~~~~~~~~

:ned:`TunInterface` is a virtual network interface that can be used for
creating tunnels, but it is more powerful than that. It lets an
application-layer module capture packets sent to the TUN interface and
do whatever it pleases with it (including sending it to a peer entity in
an UDP or plain IPv4 packet.)

To set up a tunnel, add an instance of :ned:`TunnelApp` to the node, and
specify the protocol (IPv4 or UDP) and the remote endpoint of the tunnel
(address and port) in parameters.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:local-loopback:

Local Loopback
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:ned:`LoopbackInterface` provides local loopback within the network
node.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:external-interface:

External Interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:ned:`ExtInterface` represents a real-world interface, suitable for
hardware-in-the-loop simulations. External interfaces are explained in
chapter :doc:`ch-emulation`.

.. _ug:sec:interfaces:custom-network-interfaces:

Custom Network Interfaces
-------------------------

It’s also possible to build custom network interfaces, the following
example shows how to build a custom wireless interface.

.. literalinclude:: lib/Snippets.ned
   :language: ned
   :start-after: !WirelessInterfaceExample
   :end-before: !End
   :name: Wireless interface example

The above network interface contains very simple hypothetical MAC and
PHY protocols. The MAC protocol only provides acknowledgment without
other services (e.g., carrier sense, collision avoidance, collision
detection), the PHY protocol uses one of the predefined APSK modulations
for the whole signal (preamble, header, and data) without other services
(e.g., scrambling, interleaving, forward error correction).

.. [1]
   OMNeT++ ``sendDirect()`` calls
