.. role:: raw-latex(raw)
   :format: latex
..

.. _ug:cha:queueing:

Queueing Model
==============

.. _ug:sec:queueing:overview:

Overview
--------

The INET queueing model provides reusable modules for various application areas.
These modules can be used to build application traffic generators, queueing
models for MAC protocols, traffic conditioning models for quality of service
implementations, and so on.

Usage
~~~~~

The queueing modules can be used in two very different ways. For one, they can
be connected to other INET modules using gates. In this case, the modules send
and receive packets asynchronously as many other INET modules do. For example,
application packet source and packet sink modules are used this way. The other
way to use them is to directly call their C++ methods through one of the C++
interfaces of the contract package. In this case, the queueing modules are not
connected to other INET modules at all. For example, MAC protocol modules use
packet queues as submodules through C++ method calls.

Model
~~~~~

Most queueing model elements provide simple behaviors, so they are implemented
as simple modules. But queueing elements can also be composed to form more
complex behaviors. For example, priority queues, request-response based traffic
generators, traffic shapers are usually implemented as compound modules. In fact,
some of the queueing model elements provided by INET are actually realized as
compound modules using composition.

The queueing model can be found in the ``inet.queueing`` NED package. All
queueing model elements implement one or more NED module interfaces and also
the corresponding C++ interfaces from the contract folder. As a minimum, they
all implement the :cpp:`IPacketQueueingElement` interface.

Operation
~~~~~~~~~

Internally, connected queueing model elements most often communicate with each
other using synchronous C++ method calls without utilizing :cpp:`handleMessage()`.
The only exception is when an operation takes a non-zero simulation time, such
as when the processing of a packet is delayed. The connections between the model
elements are simply used to designate the caller and the callee. Other modules
can still send and receive messages through the gates of queueing model elements,
but only :cpp:`Packet` instances are allowed.

There are two new important operations on queueing model elements defined in
:cpp:`IPassivePacketSource` and :cpp:`IPassivePacketSink`. Packets can be *pushed*
into gates and packets can be *pulled* from gates. Both of these operations are
synchronous, they either finish successfully or throw an exception. The main
difference between pushing and pulling is the subject of the activity. In the
former case, when a packet is pushed, the activity is initiated by the source
of the packet. In contrast, when a packet is pulled, the activity is initiated
by the sink of the packet. In both cases, the passive elements can be asked
via separate methods to tell if they can be pushed or pulled on a specific gate
in their current state either with respect to a specific packet or any packet
thereof.

Queueing model elements can be divided into two categories with respect to the
operation on a given gate: *passive* and *active*. The passive model elements
are pushed into and pulled from by other connected modules. In contrast, the
active model elements push into and pull from other connected modules as they see
fit. They implement the interfaces :cpp:`IActivePacketSource` and :cpp:`IActivePacketSink`.

The active queueing elements take into consideration the state of the connected
passive elements. That is, they push or pull packets only when the passive end is
able to consume or provide, respectively. The queueing model elements also validate
the assembled structure during module initialization with respect to the active
and passive behavior of the connected gates. That is, active output gates must
be connected to passive input gates, and active input gates must be connected
to passive output gates.

The mechanism that allows passive modules to prevent a push or pull operation
of an active module is called backpressure. For example, a queue that is full,
and which doesn't have a configured packet dropping mechanism generates backpressure
towards the connected active packet source. This backpressure prevents the source
from pushing more packets into the queue. Similarly an empty queue generates
backpressure towards the connected active server component. The backpressure
prevents the server from pulling more packets from the queue. In general,
backpressure can be generated by modules on their own any time they want, it
can be transferred from one gate to another, or it can be simply absorbed by a
module. For example, a scheduler transfers the backpressure from its input gates
towards its output gate, and similarly a classifier transfers backpressure from
its output gates towards its input gate. Finally, modules can choose if they
consider or ignore the backpressure from the connected modules. In the latter
case, the push and pull operations may cause a runtime error.

Pushing a packet into a gate (and similarly pulling a packet from a gate) can
have far reaching consequences by triggering a chain of operations potentially
by passing through multiple connected elements. For example, pushing a packet
into a classifier will immediately push the packet into one of the connected
queueing elements, and will also potentially lead to additional operations on
further connected elements. Similarly, pulling a packet from a scheduler will
immediately pull a packet from one of the connected queueing elements, and will
also potentially lead to additional operations on further connected elements.

In general, the following equation about the number of packets holds true for
all queueing model elements:

#created + #pushed - #pulled - #removed - #dropped = #available + #delayed

Sources
-------

These modules act as sources of packets. An active packet source pushes packets
to its output. A passive packet source returns a packet when it is pulled by
other queueing model elements.

-  :ned:`ActivePacketSource`: generic source that produces packets periodically
-  :ned:`PassivePacketSource`: generic source that provides packets as requested
-  :ned:`BurstyPacketProducer`: mixes two different sources to generate bursty traffic
-  :ned:`QueueFiller`: produces packets to continuously fill a queue
-  :ned:`ResponseProducer`: produces complex response traffic based on the incoming request type
-  :ned:`PcapFilePacketProducer`: replays packets from a PCAP file
-  :ned:`EmptyPacketSource`: doesn't push packets and doesn't allow packets to be pulled

Sinks
-----

These modules act as sinks of packets. An active packet sink pulls packets from
its input. A passive packet sink is pushed with packets by other queueing model
elements.

-  :ned:`ActivePacketSink`: generic sink that collects packets periodically
-  :ned:`PassivePacketSink`: generic sink that consumes packets as they arrive
-  :ned:`RequestConsumer`: processes incoming requests in order and initiates response traffic
-  :ned:`PcapFilePacketConsumer`: writes packets to a PCAP file
-  :ned:`FullPacketSink`: doesn't pull packets and doesn't allow packets to be pushed

Queues
------

These modules store packets and maintain an ordering among them. Queues do not
delay packets, so if a queue is not empty, then a packet is always available.
When a packet is pushed into the input of a queue, then the packet is either
stored, or if the queue is overloaded, it is dropped. When a packet is pulled
from the output of a queue, then one of the stored packets is returned.

The following simpler equation about the number of packets always holds true for queues:

#pushed - #pulled - #dropped - #removed = #queueLength = #available

-  :ned:`PacketQueue`: generic queue that provides ordering and selective dropping

   parameterizable with an :cpp:`IPacketComparatorFunction` and an :cpp:`IPacketDropperFunction`

-  :ned:`DropHeadQueue`: drops packets at the head of the queue
-  :ned:`DropTailQueue`: drops packets at the tail of the queue, the most commonly used queue
-  :ned:`PriorityQueue`: contains several subqueues that share a buffer
-  :ned:`RedDropperQueue`: combines random early detection with a queue
-  :ned:`CompoundPacketQueueBase`: allows building complex queues by pure NED composition

Buffers
-------

These modules deal with memory allocation of packets without considering the
ordering among them. A packet buffer generally doesn't have gates, and packets
are not pushed into or pulled from it.

-  :ned:`PacketBuffer`: generic buffer that provides shared storage between several queues

   parameterizable with an :cpp:`IPacketDropperFunction`

-  :ned:`PriorityBuffer`: drops packets based on the queue priority

Filters
-------

These modules filter for specific packets while dropping the rest. When a packet
is pushed into the input of a packet filter, then the filter either pushes the
packet to its output or it simply drops the packet. In contrast, when a packet
is pulled from the output of a packet filter, then it continuously pulls and drops
packets from its input until it finds one that matches the filter criteria.

-  :ned:`PacketFilter`: generic packet filter

   parameterizable with an :cpp:`IPacketFilterFunction`

-  :ned:`ContentBasedFilter`: drops packets based on the data they contain
-  :ned:`OrdinalBasedDropper`: drops packets based on their ordinal number
-  :ned:`StatisticalRateLimiter`: drops packets above the specified packetrate or datarate
-  :ned:`RedDropper`: drops packets based on random early detection

Classifiers
-----------

These modules classify packets to one of their outputs. When a packet is pushed
into the input of a packet classifier, then it immediately pushes the packet to
one of its outputs.

-  :ned:`PacketClassifier`: generic packet classifier

   parameterizable with an :cpp:`IPacketClassifierFunction`

-  :ned:`PriorityClassifier`: classifies packets to the first non-full output
-  :ned:`WrrClassifier`: classifies packets in a weighted round-robin manner
-  :ned:`LabelClassifier`: classifies packets based on the attached labels
-  :ned:`MarkovClassifier`: classifies packets based on the state of a Markov process
-  :ned:`UserPriorityClassifier`: classifies packets based on the attached :cpp:`UserPriorityReq`
-  :ned:`ContentBasedClassifier`: classifies packets based on the data they contain

Schedulers
----------

These modules schedule packets from one of their inputs. When a packet is pulled
from the output of a packet scheduler, then it immediately pulls a packet from one
of its inputs and returns that packet.

-  :ned:`PacketScheduler`: generic packet scheduler

   parameterizable with an :cpp:`IPacketSchedulerFunction`

-  :ned:`PriorityScheduler`: schedules packets from the first non-empty source
-  :ned:`WrrScheduler`: schedules packets in a weighted round-robin manner
-  :ned:`LabelScheduler`: schedules packets based on the attached labels
-  :ned:`MarkovScheduler`: schedules packets based on the state of a Markov process
-  :ned:`ContentBasedScheduler`: schedules packets based on the data they contain

Servers
-------

These modules process packets in order one by one. A packet server actively pulls
packets from its input when it sees fit, and it also actively pushes packets into
its output.

-  :ned:`PacketServer`: serves packets according to the processing time based on packet length
-  :ned:`TokenBasedServer`: serves packets when the required number of tokens are available (token generators are described later)

Markers
-------

These modules attach some information to packets on an individual basis. Packets
can be both pushed into the input and pulled from the output of packet markers.

-  :ned:`PacketLabeler`: generic marker which attaches labels to matching packets

   parameterizable with an :cpp:`IPacketFilterFunction`

-  :ned:`ContentBasedLabeler`: attaches labels to packets based on the data they contain 
-  :ned:`PacketTagger`: attaches tags such as outgoing interface, hopLimit, VLAN, user priority to matching packets 

   parameterizable with an :cpp:`IPacketFilterFunction`

-  :ned:`ContentBasedTagger`: attaches tags to packets based on the data they contain 

Meters
------

These modules measure some property of a stream of packets. Packets can be both
pushed into the input and pulled from the output of packet meters.

-  :ned:`ExponentialRateMeter`: Measures the packetrate and datarate of the packet stream. Takes older packets into account with an exponentially decreasing weight 
-  :ned:`SlidingWindowRateMeter`: Measures the packetrate and datarate of the packet stream. Takes packets into account only in the given time window

Token generators
----------------

These modules generate tokens for other modules. A token generator generally
doesn't have gates and packets are not pushed into or pulled from it.

-  :ned:`TimeBasedTokenGenerator`: generates tokens based on elapsed simulation time
-  :ned:`PacketBasedTokenGenerator`: generates tokens based on received packets
-  :ned:`SignalBasedTokenGenerator`: generates tokens based on received signals
-  :ned:`QueueBasedTokenGenerator`: generates tokens based on the state of a queue

Conditioners
------------

These modules actively shape traffic by changing the order of packets, dropping
packets, delaying packets, etc. Note that the capabilities of conditioners also
includes delaying, which queues are not capable of. Traffic conditioners are
generally built by composition using other queueing model elements.

-  :ned:`LeakyBucket`: generic shaper with overflow and configurable output rate
-  :ned:`TokenBucket`: generic shaper with overflow and configurable burstiness and output rate

Other queueing elements
-----------------------

There are also some other generic queueing model elements which don't fit well
into any of the above categories.

-  :ned:`PacketGate`: allows or prevents packets to pass through, either pushed or pulled
-  :ned:`PacketMultiplexer`: passively connects multiple inputs to a single output, packets are pushed into the inputs
-  :ned:`PacketDemultiplexer`: passively connects a single input to multiple outputs, packets are pulled from the outputs 
-  :ned:`PacketDelayer`: sends received packets to the output with some delay independently
-  :ned:`PacketCloner`: sends one copy of each received packet to all outputs
-  :ned:`PacketHistory`: keeps track of the last N packets which can be inspected in Qtenv
-  :ned:`PacketDuplicator`: sends copies of each received packet to the only output
-  :ned:`OrdinalBasedDuplicator`: duplicates received packets based on their ordinal number
