.. _ug:cha:visualization:

Visualization
=============

.. _ug:sec:visualization:overview:

Overview
--------

The INET Framework is able to visualize a wide range of events and
conditions in the network: packet drops, data link connectivity,
wireless signal path loss, transport connections, routing table routes,
and many more. Visualization is implemented as a collection of
configurable INET modules that can be added to simulations at will.

.. _ug:sec:visualization:network-communication:

Visualizing Network Communication
---------------------------------

.. _ug:sec:visualization:packet-drops:

Visualizing Packet Drops
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Several network problems manifest themselves as excessive packet drops,
for example poor connectivity, congestion, or misconfiguration.
Visualizing packet drops helps identifying such problems in simulations,
thereby reducing time spent on debugging and analysis. Poor connectivity
in a wireless network can cause senders to drop unacknowledged packets
after the retry limit is exceeded. Congestion can cause queues to
overflow in a bottleneck router, again resulting in packet drops.

Packet drops can be visualized by including a
:ned:`PacketDropVisualizer` module in the simulation. The
:ned:`PacketDropVisualizer` module indicates packet drops by displaying
an animation effect at the node where the packet drop occurs. In the
animation, a packet icon gets thrown out from the node icon, and fades
away.

The visualization of packet drops can be enabled with the visualizer’s
:par:`displayPacketDrops` parameter. By default, packet drops at all
nodes are visualized. This selection can be narrowed with the
:par:`nodeFilter`, :par:`interfaceFilter` and :par:`packetFilter`
parameters.

One can click on the packet drop icon to display information about the
packet drop in the inspector panel.

Packets are dropped for the following reasons:

-  queue overflow

-  retry limit exceeded

-  unroutable packet

-  network address resolution failed

-  interface down

.. _ug:sec:visualization:transport-path-activity:

Visualizing Transport Path Activity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With INET simulations, it is often useful to be able to visualize
network traffic. INET provides several visualizers for this task,
operating at various levels of the network stack. One of such
visualizers is :ned:`TransportRouteVisualizer` that provides graphical
feedback about transport layer traffic.

:ned:`TransportRouteVisualizer` visualizes traffic that passes through
the transport layers of two endpoints. Adding an
:ned:`IntegratedVisualizer` is also an option, because it also contains
a :ned:`TransportRouteVisualizer`. Transport path activity visualization
is disabled by default, it can be enabled by setting the visualizer’s
:par:`displayRoutes` parameter to true.

:ned:`TransportRouteVisualizer` observes packets that pass through the
transport layer, i.e. carry data from/to higher layers.

The activity between two nodes is represented visually by a polyline
arrow which points from the source node to the destination node.
:ned:`TransportRouteVisualizer` follows packets throughout their path so
that the polyline goes through all nodes which are the part of the path
of packets. The arrow appears after the first packet has been received,
then gradually fades out unless it is reinforced by further packets.
Color, fading time and other graphical properties can be changed with
parameters of the visualizer.

By default, all packets and nodes are considered for the visualization.
This selection can be narrowed with the visualizer’s packetFilter and
nodeFilter parameters.

.. _ug:sec:visualization:network-path-activity:

Visualizing Network Path Activity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Network layer traffic can be visualized by including a
:ned:`NetworkRouteVisualizer` module in the simulation. Adding an
:ned:`IntegratedVisualizer` module is also an option, because it also
contains a :ned:`NetworkRouteVisualizer` module. Network path activity
visualization is disabled by default, it can be enabled by setting the
visualizer’s :par:`displayRoutes` parameter to true.

:ned:`NetworkRouteVisualizer` currently observes packets that pass
through the network layer (i.e. carry data from/to higher layers), but
not those that are internal to the operation of the network layer
protocol. That is, packets such as ARP, although potentially useful,
will not trigger the visualization.

The activity between two nodes is represented visually by a polyline
arrow which points from the source node to the destination node.
:ned:`NetworkRouteVisualizer` follows packet throughout its path so the
polyline goes through all nodes that are part of the packet’s path. The
arrow appears after the first packet has been received, then gradually
fades out unless it is reinforced by further packets. Color, fading time
and other graphical properties can be changed with parameters of the
visualizer.

By default, all packets and nodes are considered for the visualization.
This selection can be narrowed with the visualizer’s packetFilter and
nodeFilter parameters.

.. _ug:sec:visualization:data-link-activity:

Visualizing Data Link Activity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Data link activity (layer 2 traffic) can be visualized by adding a
:ned:`DataLinkVisualizer` module to the simulation. Adding an
:ned:`IntegratedVisualizer` module is also an option, because it
includes a :ned:`DataLinkVisualizer` module. Data link visualization is
disabled by default, it can be enabled by setting the visualizer’s
displayLinks parameter to true.

:ned:`DataLinkVisualizer` currently observes packets that pass through
the data link layer (i.e. carry data from/to higher layers), but not
those that are internal to the operation of the data link layer
protocol. That is, frames such as ACK, RTS/CTS, Beacon or
Authentication/Association frames of IEEE 802.11, although potentially
useful, will not trigger the visualization. Visualizing such frames may
be implemented in future INET revisions.

The activity between two nodes is represented visually by an arrow that
points from the sender node to the receiver node. The arrow appears
after the first packet has been received, then gradually fades out
unless it is refreshed by further packets. The style, color, fading time
and other graphical properties can be changed with parameters of the
visualizer.

By default, all packets, interfaces and nodes are considered for the
visualization. This selection can be narrowed to certain packets and/or
nodes with the visualizer’s :par:`packetFilter`, :par:`interfaceFilter`,
and :par:`nodeFilter` parameters.

.. _ug:sec:visualization:physical-link-activity:

Visualizing Physical Link Activity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Physical link activity can be visualized by including a
:ned:`PhysicalLinkVisualizer` module in the simulation. Adding an
:ned:`IntegratedVisualizer` module is also an option, because it also
contains a :ned:`PhysicalLinkVisualizer` module. Physical link activity
visualization is disabled by default, it can be enabled by setting the
visualizer’s :par:`displayLinks` parameter to true.

:ned:`PhysicalLinkVisualizer` observes frames that pass through the
physical layer, i.e. are received correctly.

The activity between two nodes is represented visually by a dotted arrow
which points from the sender node to the receiver node. The arrow
appears after the first frame has been received, then gradually fades
out unless it is refreshed by further frames. Color, fading time and
other graphical properties can be changed with parameters of the
visualizer.

By default, all packets, interfaces and nodes are considered for the
visualization. This selection can be narrowed with the visualizer’s
:par:`packetFilter`, :par:`interfaceFilter`, and :par:`nodeFilter`
parameters.

.. _ug:sec:visualization:routing-tables:

Visualizing Routing Tables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In a complex network topology, it is difficult to see how a packet would
be routed because the relevant data is scattered among network nodes and
hidden in their routing tables. INET contains support for visualization
of routing tables, and can display routing information graphically in a
concise way. Using visualization, it is often possible to understand
routing in a simulation without looking into individual routing tables.
The visualization currently supports IPv4.

The :ned:`RoutingTableVisualizer` module (included in the network as
part of :ned:`IntegratedVisualizer`) is responsible for visualizing
routing table entries.

The visualizer basically annotates network links with labeled arrows
that connect source nodes to next hop nodes. The module visualizes those
routing table entries that participate in the routing of a given set of
destination addresses, by default the addresses of all interfaces of all
nodes in the network. That is, it selects the best (longest prefix)
matching routes for all destination addresses from each routing table,
and shows them as arrows that point to the next hop. Note that one arrow
might need to represent several routing entries, for example when
distinct prefixes are routed towards the same next hop.

Routing table entries are represented visually by solid arrows. An arrow
going from a source node represents a routing table entry in the source
node’s routing table. The endpoint node of the arrow is the next hop in
the visualized routing table entry. By default, the routing entry is
displayed on the arrows in following format:



::

   destination/mask -> gateway (interface)

The format can be changed by setting the visualizer’s :par:`labelFormat`
parameter.

Filtering is also possible. The :par:`nodeFilter` parameter controls
which nodes’ routing tables should be visualized (by default, all
nodes), and the :par:`destinationFilter` parameter selects the set of
destination nodes to consider (again, by default all nodes.)

The visualizer reacts to changes. For example, when a routing protocol
changes a routing entry, or an IP address gets assigned to an interface
by DHCP, the visualizer automatically updates the visualizations
according to the specified filters. This is very useful e.g. for the
simulation of mobile ad-hoc networks.

.. _ug:sec:visualization:displaying-ip-addresses-and-other-interface-information:

Displaying IP Addresses and Other Interface Information
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the simulation of complex networks, it is often useful to be able to
display node IP addresses, interface names, etc. above the node icons or
on the links. For example, when automatic address assignment is used in
a hierarchical network (e.g. using :ned:`Ipv4NetworkConfigurator`),
visual inspection can help to verify that the result matches the
expectations. While it is true that addresses and other interface data
can also be accessed in the GUI by diving into the interface tables of
each node, that is tedious, and unsuitable for getting an overview.

The :ned:`InterfaceTableVisualizer` module (included in the network as
part of :ned:`IntegratedVisualizer`) displays data about network nodes’
interfaces. (Interfaces are contained in interface tables, hence the
name.) By default, the visualization is turned off. When it is enabled
using the :par:`displayInterfaceTables` parameter, the default is that
interface names, IP addresses and netmask length are displayed, above
the nodes (for wireless interfaces) and on the links (for wired
interfaces). By clicking on an interface label, details are displayed in
the inspector panel.

The visualizer has several configuration parameters. The :par:`format`
parameter specifies what information is displayed about interfaces. It
takes a format string, which can contain the following directives:

-  %N: interface name

-  %4: IPv4 address

-  %6: IPv6 address

-  %n: network address. This is either the IPv4 or the IPv6 address

-  %l: netmask length

-  %M: MAC address

-  %\: conditional newline for wired interfaces. The ’\’ needs to be
   escaped with another ’\’, i.e. ’%\\’

-  %i and %s: the info() and str() functions for the interfaceEntry
   class, respectively

The default format string is ``"%N %\\%n/%l"``, i.e. interface name, IP
address and netmask length.

The set of visualized interfaces can be selected with the configurator’s
:par:`nodeFilter` and :par:`interfaceFilter` parameters. By default, all
interfaces of all nodes are visualized, except for loopback addresses
(the default for the :par:`interfaceFilter` parameter is ``"not lo\"``.)

It is possible to display the labels for wired interfaces above the node
icons, instead of on the links. This can be done by setting the
:par:`displayWiredInterfacesAtConnections` parameter to false.

There are also several parameters for styling, such as color and font
selection.

.. _ug:sec:visualization:ieee-80211-network-membership:

Visualizing IEEE 802.11 Network Membership
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When simulating wifi networks that overlap in space, it is difficult to
see which node is a member of which network. The membership may even
change over time. It would be useful to be able to display e.g. the SSID
above node icons.

IEEE 802.11 network membership can be visualized by including a
:ned:`Ieee80211Visualizer` module in the simulation. Adding an
:ned:`IntegratedVisualizer` is also an option, because it also contains
a :ned:`Ieee80211Visualizer`. Displaying network membership is disabled
by default, it can be enabled by setting the visualizer’s
:par:`displayAssociations` parameter to true.

The :ned:`Ieee80211Visualizer` displays an icon and the SSID above
network nodes which are part of a wifi network. The icons are
color-coded according to the SSID. The icon, colors, and other visual
properties can be configured via parameters of the visualizer.

The visualizer’s :par:`nodeFilter` parameter selects which nodes’
memberships are visualized. The :par:`interfaceFilter` parameter selects
which interfaces are considered in the visualization. By default, all
interfaces of all nodes are considered.

.. _ug:sec:visualization:transport-connections:

Visualizing Transport Connections
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In a large network with a complex topology, there might be many
transport layer applications and many nodes communicating. In such a
case, it might be difficult to see which nodes communicate with which,
or if there is any communication at all. Transport connection
visualization makes it easy to get information about the active
transport connections in the network at a glance. Visualization makes it
easy to identify connections by their two endpoints, and to tell
different connections apart. It also gives a quick overview about the
number of connections in individual nodes and the whole network.

The :ned:`TransportConnectionVisualizer` module (also part of
:ned:`IntegratedVisualizer`) displays color-coded icons above the two
endpoints of an active, established transport layer level connection.
The icons will appear when the connection is established, and disappear
when it is closed. Naturally, there can be multiple connections open at
a node, thus there can be multiple icons. Icons have the same color at
both ends of the connection. In addition to colors, letter codes (A, B,
AA, …) may also be displayed to help in identifying connections. Note
that this visualizer does not display the paths the packets take. If you
are interested in that, take a look at :ned:`TransportRouteVisualizer`,
covered in section :ref:`ug:sec:visualization:transport-path-activity`.

The visualization is turned off by default, it can be turned on by
setting the :par:`displayTransportConnections` parameter of the
visualizer to true.

It is possible to filter the connections being visualized. By default,
all connections are included. Filtering by hosts and port numbers can be
achieved by setting the :par:`sourcePortFilter`,
:par:`destinationPortFilter`, :par:`sourceNodeFilter` and
:par:`destinationNodeFilter` parameters.

The icon, colors and other visual properties can be configured by
setting the visualizer’s parameters.

.. _ug:sec:visualization:the-infrastructure:

Visualizing The Infrastructure
------------------------------

.. _ug:sec:visualization:the-physical-environment:

Visualizing the Physical Environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The physical environment has a profound effect on the communication of
wireless devices. For example, physical objects like walls inside
buildings constraint mobility. They also obstruct radio signals often
resulting in packet loss. It’s difficult to make sense of the simulation
without actually seeing where physical objects are.

The visualization of physical objects present in the physical
environment is essential.

The :ned:`PhysicalEnvironmentVisualizer` (also part of
:ned:`IntegratedVisualizer`) is responsible for displaying the physical
objects. The objects themselves are provided by the PhysicalEnvironment
module; their geometry, physical and visual properties are defined in
the XML configuration of the PhysicalEnvironment module.

The two-dimensional projection of physical objects is determined by the
:ned:`SceneCanvasVisualizer` module. (This is because the projection is
also needed by other visualizers, for example
:ned:`MobilityVisualizer`.) The default view is top view (z axis), but
you can also configure side view (x and y axes), or isometric or
ortographic projection.

The visualizer also supports OpenGL-based 3D rendering using the
OpenSceneGraph (OSG) library. If the OMNeT++ installation has been
compiled with OSG support, you can switch to 3D view using the Qtenv
toolbar.

.. _ug:sec:visualization:node-mobility:

Visualizing Node Mobility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In INET simulations, the movement of mobile nodes is often as important
as the communication among them. However, as mobile nodes roam, it is
often difficult to visually follow their movement. INET provides a
visualizer that not only makes visually tracking mobile nodes easier,
but also indicates other properties like speed and direction.

Node mobility of nodes can be visualized by :ned:`MobilityVisualizer`
module (included in the network as part of :ned:`IntegratedVisualizer`).
By default, mobility visualization is enabled, it can be disabled by
setting :par:`displayMovements` parameter to false.

By default, all mobilities are considered for the visualization. This
selection can be narrowed with the visualizer’s :par:`moduleFilter`
parameter.

The visualizer has several important features:

-  Movement Trail: It displays a line along the recent path of
   movements. The trail gradually fades out as time passes. Color, trail
   length and other graphical properties can be changed with parameters
   of the visualizer.

-  Velocity Vector: Velocity is represented visually by an arrow. Its
   starting point is the node, and its direction coincides with the
   movement’s direction. The arrow’s length is proportional to the
   node’s speed.

-  Orientation Arc: Node orientation is represented by an arc whose size
   is specified by the :par:`orientationArcSize` parameter. This value
   is the relative size of the arc compared to a full circle. The arc’s
   default value is 0.25, i.e. a quarter of a circle.

These features are disabled by default; they can be enabled by setting
the visualizer’s :par:`displayMovementTrails`, :par:`displayVelocities`
and :par:`displayOrientations` parameters to true.
