Step 10. Configuring ad-hoc routing (AODV)
==========================================

Goals
-----

In this step, we configure a routing protocol that adapts to the
changing network topology and will arrange packets to be routed through
``R2`` and ``R3`` as ``R1`` departs.

We'll use AODV (ad hoc on-demand distance vector routing). It is a
reactive routing protocol, which means its maintenance of the routing
tables is driven by demand. This is in contrast to proactive routing
protocols which keep routing tables up to date all the time (or at least
try to).

The model
---------

Let's configure ad-hoc routing with AODV. As AODV will manage the
routing tables, we don't need the statically added routes anymore. We
only need :ned:`Ipv4NetworkConfigurator` to assign the IP addresses and
turn all other functions off.

More importantly, we change the hosts to be instances of :ned:`AodvRouter`.
:ned:`AodvRouter` is like :ned:`WirelessHost`, but with an added
``AodvRouting`` submodule. This change turns each node into an AODV
router.

AODV stands for Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector. In AODV, routes are
established as they are needed. Once established, a route is maintained
as long as it is needed.

In AODV, the network is silent until a connection is needed. At that
point, the network node that needs a connection broadcasts a request for
connection. Other AODV nodes forward this message and record the node
that they heard it from, creating an explosion of temporary routes back
to the needy node. When a node receives such a message and already has a
route to the desired node, it sends a message backward through a
temporary route to the requesting node. The needy node then begins using
the route that has the least number of hops through other nodes. Unused
entries in the routing tables are recycled after a time.

The message types defined by AODV are Route Request (RREQ), Route Reply
(RREP), and Route Error (RERRs). We expect to see these messages at the
start of the simulation (when an initial route needs to be established),
and later when the topology of the network changes due to the movement
of nodes.

The configuration:



.. literalinclude:: ../omnetpp.ini
   :language: ini
   :start-at: [Config Wireless10]
   :end-before: #---

Results
-------

Host R1 moves out of communication range of hosts A and B. The route
that was established through R1 is broken. Hosts R2 and R3 are in the
right position to relay host A's packets to host B, and the AODV
protocol reconfigures the route to go through R2 and R3. The UDP stream
is re-established using these intermediate hosts to relay host A's
packets to host B. This can be seen in the animation below.



.. video:: media/wireless-step10.mp4
   :width: 655
   :height: 575



.. <!--internal video recording, animation time = playback speed = 1, fadeOutMode animationTime, 1s -> 26 sec video, blue arrows only
   if playback speed = 2 -> 13 sec video, blue and red arrows
   not sure which one is better
   -->

AODV detects when a route is no longer able to pass packets. When the
link is broken, there are no ACKs arriving at host A, so its AODV
submodule triggers the reconfiguration of the route. To detect possible
new routes and establish one, there is a burst of AODV transmissions
between the hosts, and a new route is established through hosts R2 and
R3. This detection and reconfiguration take very little time. After the
AODV packet burst, the arrows displaying it fade quickly, and the UDP
traffic continues.

The AODV route discovery messages can be seen in the following packet
log:

.. figure:: media/wireless-step10-packetlog.png
   :width: 100%

The number of successfully received packets at host B has roughly
doubled compared to the previous step. This is because the flow of
packets doesn't stop when host R1 gets out of communication range of
host A. Although the AODV protocol adds some overhead, in this
simulation, it is not significant, and the number of received packets still
increases substantially.

**Number of packets received by host B: 956**

Sources: :download:`omnetpp.ini <../omnetpp.ini>`,
:download:`WirelessB.ned <../WirelessB.ned>`

Discussion
----------

Use `this
page <https://github.com/inet-framework/inet-tutorials/issues/1>`__ in
the GitHub issue tracker for commenting on this tutorial.
