Step 4. Setting up static routing
=================================

Goals
-----

In this step, we set up routing so that packets can flow from host A to
B. For this to happen, the intermediate nodes will need to act as
routers. As we still want to keep things simple, we'll use statically
added routes that remain unchanged throughout the simulation.

We also configure visualization so that we can see the paths packets
take when traveling from host A to B.

The model
---------

Setting up routing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For the recently added hosts to act as routers, IPv4 forwarding needs to
be enabled. This can be done by setting the ``forwarding`` parameter of
:ned:`StandardHost`.

We also need to set up static routing. Static configuration in the INET
Framework is often done by configurator modules. Static IPv4
configuration, including address assignment and adding routes, is
usually done using the :ned:`Ipv4NetworkConfigurator` module. The model
already has an instance of this module, the ``configurator`` submodule.
The configurator can be configured using an XML specification and some
additional parameters. Here, the XML specification is provided as a
string constant inside the ini file.

Without going into details about the contents of the XML configuration
string and other configurator parameters, we tell the configurator to
assign IP addresses in the 10.0.0.x range, and to create routes based on
the estimated packet error rate of links between the nodes. (The
configurator looks at the wireless network as a full graph. Links with
high error rates will have high costs, and links with low error rates
will have low costs. Routes are formed such as to minimize their costs.
In the case of the :ned:`GenericUnitDiskRadio` model, the error rate is 1 for
nodes that are out of range and a very small value for ones in range.
The result will be that nodes that are out of range of each other will
send packets to intermediate nodes that can forward them.)

Visualization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ned:`IntegratedCanvasVisualizer` we use as the ``visualizer``
submodule in this network contains a ``networkRouteVisualizer`` module,
which is able to render packet paths. This module displays paths where a
packet has been recently sent between the network layers of the two end
hosts. The path is displayed as a colored arrow that goes through the
visited hosts. The path continually fades, and then it disappears after a
certain amount of time unless it is reinforced by another packet.

The network route visualizer is activated by setting its
``displayRoutes`` parameter to ``true``. Its ``packetFilter`` parameter
specifies which packets it should take into account. By default, it is
set to ``*``, which means all packets. Our UDP application generates
packets with the name ``UDPData-0``, ``UDPData-1``, etc, so we set the
packet filter to ``UDPData*`` in order to filter out other types of
packets that will appear in later steps.

Configuration:



.. literalinclude:: ../omnetpp.ini
   :language: ini
   :start-at: [Config Wireless04]
   :end-before: #---

Results
-------

Routing tables are stored in the ``routingTable`` submodules of hosts,
and can be inspected in the runtime GUI. The routing table of host A
(10.0.0.1) can be seen in the following image. It tells that host B
(10.0.0.2) can be reached via host R1 (10.0.0.3), as specified by the
gateway (gw) value.

.. figure:: media/wireless-step4-rt.png
   :width: 100%

When the first packet sent by host A arrives at host R1, a dotted dark
yellow arrow appears between the two hosts indicating a successful
physical layer exchange, as it was noted earlier. A few events later but
still at the same simulation time, a cyan-colored arrow appears on top
of the dotted one. The cyan arrow represents a successful exchange
between the two data link layers of the same hosts. As opposed to the
previous step, this happens because according to the routing table of
host A, a packet destined to host B, has to be sent to host R1 (the
gateway). As the packet reaches the network layer of host R1, it is
immediately routed according to the routing table of this host directly
towards host B. So when the first packet arrives at host B, first a
dotted arrow appears, then a cyan arrow appears on top of that,
similarly to the host R1 case. Still at the same simulation time, the
packet leaves the network layer of host B towards the UDP protocol
component. At this moment a new polyline arrow appears between host A
and host B going through host R1. This blue arrow represents the route
the packet has taken from first entering the network layer at host A
until it left the network layer at host B.

Note that there are dotted arrows leading to host R2 and R3 even though
they don't transmit. This is because they receive the transmissions at
the physical layer, but they discard the packets at the link layer
because it is not addressed to them.

.. video:: media/step4-4-1.mp4

.. <!--internal video recording, playback speed 0.72, fadeOutMode animationTime, fadeOutTime 1.5s, normal run until event #184-->
   <!--crop green background: top bottom left right 8 5 8 5 width 655-->

Note that the number of packets received by host B has dropped to about
half of what we saw in step 2. This is so because R1's NIC operates in
half-duplex mode (it can only transmit or receive at any time, but not
both), so it can only relay packets at half the rate that host A emits.

**Number of packets received by host B: 1125**

Sources: :download:`omnetpp.ini <../omnetpp.ini>`,
:download:`WirelessB.ned <../WirelessB.ned>`

Discussion
----------

Use `this page <https://github.com/inet-framework/inet-tutorials/issues/1>`__ in
the GitHub issue tracker for commenting on this tutorial.
