Step 5. Taking interference into account
========================================

Goals
-----

In this step, we make our model of the physical layer a little bit more
realistic. First, we turn on interference modeling in the unit disc
radio. By interference, we mean that if two signals collide (arrive at
the receiver at the same time), they will become garbled and the
reception will fail. (Remember that so far we were essentially modeling
pairwise duplex communication.)

Second, we'll set the interference range of the unit disc radio to be
500m, twice as much as the communication range. The interference range
parameter acknowledges the fact that radio signals become weaker with
distance, and there is a range where they can no longer be received
correctly, but they are still strong enough to interfere with other
signals, that is, can cause the reception to fail. (For completeness,
there is a third range called detection range, where signals are too
weak to cause interference, but can still be detected by the receiver.)

Of course, this change reduces the throughput of the communication
channel, so we expect the number of packets that go through to drop.

The model
---------

To turn on interference modeling, we set the ``ignoreInterference``
parameter in the receiver part of :ned:`UnitDiskRadio` to ``false``.
Interference range is the ``interferenceRange`` parameter of
:ned:`UnitDiskRadio`'s transmitter part, so we set that to 500m.

We expect that although host B will not be able to receive host A's
transmissions, those transmissions will still cause interference with
other (e.g. R1's) transmissions at host B.

Regarding visualization, we turn off the arrows indicating successful
data link layer receptions, because in our case, it does not add much
value above displaying the network routes.



.. literalinclude:: ../omnetpp.ini
   :language: ini
   :start-at: [Config Wireless05]
   :end-before: #---

Results
-------

Host A is transmitting packets generated by its UDP Application module.
R1 is at the right position to act as a relay between A and B, and it
retransmits A's packets to B as soon as it receives them. Most of the
time, A and R1 are transmitting simultaneously, causing two signals to
be present at the receiver of host B, which results in collisions. When
the gap between host A's two successive transmissions is large enough,
R1 can transmit a packet without collision at B.

When the packet UDPData-54 of host A arrives at host R1, it gets routed
towards host B, so host R1 immediately starts transmitting it.
Unfortunately, at the same time, host A already transmits the next packet
(UDPData-55) back-to-back with the previous one. Thus, the reception of
UDPData-54 from host R1 at host B fails due to a collision. The
colliding packets are the UDPData-55 from host A and UDPData-54 from
host R1. This is indicated by the lack of appearance of a blue polyline
arrow between host A and host B.

Luckily, the next packet (UDPData-56) of host A is not part of a
back-to-back transmission. When it gets routed and retransmitted at host
R1, there's no other transmission from host A to collide with at host B.
Interestingly, the first bit of the transmission of host R1 is just
after the last bit of the transmission of host A. This happens because
the processing, including the routing decision, at host R1 takes zero
amount of time. The successful transmission is indicated by the
appearance of the blue polyline arrow between host A and host B.

This is shown in the animation below:



.. video:: media/wireless-step5-1.mp4
   :width: 655
   :height: 575



   <!--internal video recording, playback speed 0.72, from #1418-->

As we expected, the number of packets received by host B is low. The
following sequence chart illustrates packet traffic between hosts A's,
R1's and B's network layer. The image indicates that host B only
occasionally receives packets successfully; most packets sent by R1 do
not make it to host B's IP layer.

.. figure:: media/wireless-step5-seq.png
   :width: 100%

The sequence chart below shows host R1's and host A's signals
overlapping at host B.

NOTE: On this and all other sequence charts in this tutorial, grey
vertical strips are constant-time zones: all events within the same grey
area have the same simulation time. Also, time is mapped to the
horizontal axis using a nonlinear transformation, so that both small and
large time intervals can be depicted on the same chart. A larger
distance along the horizontal axis does not necessarily correspond a
larger simulation time interval, because the more events there are in an
interval, the more it is inflated to make the events visible and
discernible on the chart.

.. figure:: media/wireless-step5-seq-2.png
   :width: 100%

To minimize interference, some kind of media access protocol is needed
to govern which host can transmit and when.

**Number of packets received by host B: 183**

Sources: :download:`omnetpp.ini <../omnetpp.ini>`,
:download:`WirelessB.ned <../WirelessB.ned>`

Discussion
----------

Use `this
page <https://github.com/inet-framework/inet/discussions/998>`__ in
the GitHub issue tracker for commenting on this tutorial.
