:orphan:

.. _dg:cha:ethernet:

The Ethernet Model
==================

Sending Ethernet Frames
-----------------------

TODO tags etc

Receiving Ethernet Frames
-------------------------

TODO tags etc

Frames
------

The INET defines these frames in the :file:`EtherFrame.msg` file.
The models supports Ethernet II, 803.2 with LLC header, and 803.3 with
LLC and SNAP headers. The corresponding classes are:
:msg:`EthernetIIFrame`, :msg:`EtherFrameWithLlc` and
:msg:`EtherFrameWithSNAP`. They all class from :msg:`EtherFrame` which
only represents the basic MAC frame with source and destination
addresses. :ned:`EtherMac` only deals with :msg:`EtherFrame`’s, and does
not care about the specific subclass.

Ethernet frames carry data packets as encapsulated cMessage objects.
Data packets can be of any message type (cMessage or cMessage subclass).

The model encapsulates data packets in Ethernet frames using the
``encapsulate()`` method of cMessage. Encapsulate() updates the
length of the Ethernet frame too, so the model doesn’t have to take care
of that.

The fields of the Ethernet header are passed in a :cpp:`Ieee802Ctrl`
control structure to the LLC by the network layer.

EtherJam, EtherPadding (interframe gap), EtherPauseFrame?

EtherLlc
--------

EtherFrameWithLLC

SAP registration

:ned:`EtherLlc` and higher layers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ned:`EtherLlc` module can serve several applications (higher layer
protocols), and dispatch data to them. Higher layers are identified by
DSAP. See section "Application registration" for more info.

:ned:`EtherEncap` doesn’t have the functionality to dispatch to
different higher layers because in practice it’ll always be used with
IP.

Communication between LLC and Higher Layers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Higher layers (applications or protocols) talk to the :ned:`EtherLlc`
module.

When a higher layer wants to send a packet via Ethernet, it just passes
the data packet (a cMessage or any subclass) to :ned:`EtherLlc`. The
message kind has to be set to IEEE802CTRL_DATA.

In general, if :ned:`EtherLlc` receives a packet from the higher layers,
it interprets the message kind as a command. The commands include
IEEE802CTRL_DATA (send a frame), IEEE802CTRL_REGISTER_DSAP (register
highher layer) IEEE802CTRL_DEREGISTER_DSAP (deregister higher layer) and
IEEE802CTRL_SENDPAUSE (send PAUSE frame) – see EtherLLC for a more
complete list.

The arguments to the command are NOT inside the data packet but in a
"control info" data structure of class :cpp:`Ieee802Ctrl`, attached to
the packet. See controlInfo() method of cMessage (OMNeT++ 3.0).

For example, to send a packet to a given MAC address and protocol
identifier, the application sets the data packet’s message kind to
ETH_DATA ("please send this data packet" command), fills in the
:ned:`Ieee802Ctrl` structure with the destination MAC address and the
protocol identifier, adds the control info to the message, then sends
the packet to :ned:`EtherLlc`.

When the command doesn’t involve a data packet (e.g.
IEEE802CTRL_(DE)REGISTER_DSAP, IEEE802CTRL_SENDPAUSE), a dummy packet
(empty cMessage) is used.

Rationale
~~~~~~~~~

The alternative of the above communications would be:

-  adding the parameters such as destination address into the data
   packet. This would be a poor solution since it would make the higher
   layers specific to the Ethernet model.

-  encapsulating a data packet into an *interface packet* which contains
   the destination address and other parameters. The disadvantages of
   this approach is the overhead associated with creating and destroying
   the interface packets.

Using a control structure is more efficient than the interface packet
approach, because the control structure can be created once inside the
higher layer and be reused for every packet.

It may also appear to be more intuitive in Tkenv because one can observe
data packets travelling between the higher layer and Ethernet modules –
as opposed to "interface" packets.

EtherLLC: SAP Registration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Ethernet model supports multiple applications or higher layer
protocols.

So that data arriving from the network can be dispatched to the correct
applications (higher layer protocols), applications have to register
themselves in :ned:`EtherLlc`. The registration is done with the
IEEE802CTRL_REGISTER_DSAP command (see section "Communication between
LLC and higher layers") which associates a SAP with the LLC port.
Different applications have to connect to different ports of
:ned:`EtherLlc`.

The ETHERCTRL_REGISTER_DSAP/IEEE802CTRL_DEREGISTER_DSAP commands use
only the dsap field in the :cpp:`Ieee802Ctrl` structure.

EtherMac
--------

The operation of the MAC module can be schematized by the following
state chart:

.. graphviz:: figures/EtherMAC_txstates.dot
   :align: center

Unlike :ned:`EtherMacFullDuplex`, this MAC module processes the incoming
packets when their first bit is received. The end of the reception is
calculated by the MAC and detected by scheduling a self message.

When frames collide the transmission is aborted – in this case the
transmitting station transmits a jam signal. Jam signals are represented
by a :msg:`EtherJam` message. The jam message contains the tree
identifier of the frame whose transmission is aborted. When the
:ned:`EtherMac` receives a jam signal, it knows that the corresponding
transmission ended in jamming and have been aborted. Thus when it
receives as many jams as collided frames, it can be sure that the
channel is free again. (Receiving a jam message marks the beginning of
the jam signal, so actually has to wait for the duration of the
jamming.)

EtherMacFullDuplex
------------------

Outgoing packets are transmitted according to the following state
diagram:

.. graphviz:: figures/EtherMACFullDuplex_txstates.dot
   :align: center

EthernetInterface
-----------------

Queueing
~~~~~~~~

When the transmission line is busy, messages received from the upper
layer needs to be queued.

In routers, MAC relies on an external queue module (see
:ned:`OutputQueue`), and requests packets from this external queue
one-by-one. The name of the external queue must be given as the
:par:`queueModule` parameer. There are implementations of
:ned:`OutputQueue` to model finite buffer, QoS and/or RED.

In hosts, no such queue is used, so MAC contains an internal queue named
:var:`txQueue` to queue up packets waiting for transmission.
Conceptually, :var:`txQueue` is of infinite size, but for better
diagnostics one can specify a hard limit in the :par:`txQueueLimit`
parameter – if this is exceeded, the simulation stops with an error.

.. _subsec:pause_handling:

PAUSE handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The 802.3x standard supports PAUSE frames as a means of flow control.
The frame contains a timer value, expressed as a multiple of 512
bit-times, that specifies how long the transmitter should remain quiet.
If the receiver becomes uncongested before the transmitter’s pause timer
expires, the receiver may elect to send another PAUSE frame to the
transmitter with a timer value of zero, allowing the transmitter to
resume immediately.

:ned:`EtherMac` will properly respond to PAUSE frames it receives
(:msg:`EtherPauseFrame` class), however it will never send a PAUSE frame
by itself. (For one thing, it doesn’t have an input buffer that can
overflow.)

:ned:`EtherMac`, however, transmits PAUSE frames received by higher
layers, and :ned:`EtherLlc` can be instructed by a command to send a
PAUSE frame to MAC.

Error handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the MAC is not connected to the network ("cable unplugged"), it will
start up in "disabled" mode. A disabled MAC simply discards any messages
it receives. It is currently not supported to dynamically
connect/disconnect a MAC.

CRC checks are modeled by the :var:`bitError` flag of the packets.
Erronous packets are dropped by the MAC.

