:orphan:

.. _dg:cha:physicallayer:

The Physical Layer
==================

TODO which modules? C++ interface

-  ongoing transmissions

-  recent successful receptions

-  recent obstacle intersections and surface normal vectors



::

   TODO:
    - exploit multiple CPUs and the highly parallel GPU to increase performance
    - provide performance vs. accuracy tradeoff configuration options
      (e.g. range filter, radio mode filter, listening mode filter, MAC address filter)
    - support different level of details (see details below)
    - support different transmitters and receivers (scale from flat to layered models)
    - support different radio signal models (scale from range based to accurate emulation models)
    - support different propagation models (scale from immediate to accurate models)
    - support different attenuation models (scale from free space to trace based models)
    - support different antenna models (scale from isotropic to directional models)
    - support different power consumption models (scale from mode based to signal based models)
    - provide concurrent transmitter and receiver mode (transceiver mode)
    - provide burst mode (back to back) transmissions
    - provide synchronization/preamble detection
    - provide capture during reception (switching to another transmission)
    - provide finite time radio mode switching

   TODO: scalar vs dimensional
   TODO: flat vs layered
   TODO: Generic, IEEE 802.11, IEEE 802.15.4
   TODO: acoustic underwater example
   TODO: wireless vs. wired medium

Overview
--------

Today’s computing devices use a variety of wireless communication means,
such as Wifi, Bluetooth, NFC, UMTS, and LTE. Despite the diversity of
these devices, there are many commonalities in the way their physical
layers can be simulated. The models often have similar signal
representations and signal processing steps, and they also share the
physical medium model where communication takes place.

Simulating the physical layer is generally a computation-intensive task.
A detailed simulation of signal propagation, signal fading, signal
interference, and signal decoding often results in an unacceptable
performance. Finding the right abstractions, the right level of detail,
and the right trade-offs between accuracy and performance is both
difficult and important.

The physical layer model in the INET Framework has been designed with
the following goals in mind:

-  customizability

-  extensibility

-  scalable level of detail

-  ability to exploit parallel hardware

The following sections provide a brief overview of the physical layer
model. For more details on the available modules, their parameterization
and the actual implementations please refer to the documentation in the
corresponding NED and C++ source files.

Customizability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Real-world communication devices often provide a wide variety of
configuration options to allow them to be adaped to the physical
conditions where they are required to operate. For example, a Wifi
router’s administration interface often provides parameters to configure
the transmission power, bitrate, preamble type, carrier frequency, RTS
threshold, beacon interval, etc. Most of those parameters have sensible
default values assigned, so the user is not required to configure them,
but may override them as needed.

Similar to real-world devices, the INET physical layer models also
provide a wide variety of parameters to control their behavior. Many NED
parameters correspond to physical quantities such as transmission power
``[W]``, reception sensitivity ``[W]``, carrier frequency
``[Hz]``, communication range ``[m]``, propagation speed
``[m/s]``, SNIR reception threshold ``[dB]``, or bitrate
``[b/s]``. Occasionally, models have more degrees of freedom than the
real devices, to allow further experimentation.

Another important and commonly used parameter kind selects among
alternative implementations of a particular interface by providing its
name. Different implementations are often separate modules, which come
with their own set of parameters to avoid the confusion of mixing their
unrelated parameters. Some modules may be split into more submodules.
This further deepens the module hierarchy, but allows better
extensibility.

Extensibility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Similar to designing other simulation models, modeling the physical
layer is not at all an unambiguous task. For example, the research
literature contains a number of different path loss models for signal
propagation, there are different bit error models for a particular
protocol standard, representing the signal in the analog domain can also
be done in several different ways, and so on.

In order to support this diversity, the physical layer model is designed
to be extensible with alternative implementations at various parts of
the model. This is realized by separately defining C++ and NED
interfaces between modules, and also by providing parameters in their
parent modules to easily select among the available implementations.

New models can be added by implementing the required interfaces from
scratch, or by deriving from already existing implementations and
overriding functionality. This architecture allows the user to create
new models with less effort, and to focus on the real differences, while
the rest of the physical layer remains the same.

Scalable Level of Detail
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are many possible ways to model various aspects of the physical
layer. The most important difference lies in the trade-off between
performance versus accuracy. In order to support the different
trade-offs the physical layer is designed to be scalable with respect to
the simulated level of detail. In other words, it is scalable from
high-performance less accurate simulations to high fidelity slower
simulations.

The physical layer model is scalable along the following axes:

-  simulation model – statistical vs accurate

-  software architecture – flat vs layered

-  data representation – scalar vs multi-dimensional

-  number of messages – TODO

The simulation model might vary from simple statistical models to
accurate emulation. The simplest models ignore the actual bits of the
transmission. For example, the extremely simple unit disc radio even
ignores the signal power. The most accurate models use precise signal
representation for all four domains: bit domain, symbol domain, sample
domain, and analog domain representations. They also emulate most
functions of real hardware in detail: forward error correction,
interleaving, scrambling, modulation, spreading, pulse shaping, and so
on.

The software architecture might vary from flat to layered. A flat
architecture is efficient but not modular. Functionality can only be
affected through simple parameters and not by providing alternative
implementations. Whereas a layered architecture is more flexible at the
cost of more complex data structures, more data conversions, more
resource management, and thus slower processing. On the other hand, it
provides more customization opportunities to replace parts with
alternative implementations and to do research easier in the area.

The data representation might vary from scalar to multidimensional
values. In the analog domain of the physical layer data quite often
changes over time, frequency, space, or any combination thereof. The
most obvious example is the analog signal power, but there are others
such as signal phase or the signal to noise ratio.

The number of messages per transmission added to the future event queue
might vary from one to the number of radios. One message might be
sufficient, for example, if the transmission is intended to a single
destination, and other receivers are either not affected, or the effect
is negligible. On the other hand, it might be necessary to process all
transmissions by all receivers in order to have the desired effect on
the higher layers. For example, if a MAC model is configured to
promiscuous mode, it needs to receive all transmissions.

Exploiting Parallel Hardware
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The physical processes simulated by the physical layer are inherently
parallel. The computation of the transmission arrival space-time
coordinates, the analog signal representation of transmissions and
receptions, the interfering receptions and noises, the signal to noise
ratio, the decoded bits, the bit errors, and the physical layer
indications all provide a good parallelization opportunity, because they
dominate the physical layer performance and are independent for each
receiver. Therefore the physical layer is designed to be able to utilize
parallel hardware, multi-core CPUs, vector instructions and the highly
parallel GPU.

The idea is to have a central component in the software architecture
where parallel computation can happen. This central component is the
medium model that knows about all radios, transmissions, interferences,
and receptions anyway. It uses optimistic parallel computation in
multiple background threads while the main simulation thread continues
normal execution. When a new transmission enters the channel the already
computed and affected results are invalidated or updated, and the
affected ongoing optimistic parallel computations are canceled.

The Radio Model
---------------

The radio model describes the physical device that is capable of
transmitting and receiving signals on the medium. It contains an antenna
model, a transmitter model, a receiver model, and an energy consumer
model. The antenna model is shared between the transmitter model and the
receiver model. The separation of the transmitter model and the receiver
model allows asymmetric configurations. The energy consumer model is
optional and it is only used when the simulation of energy consumption
is necessary.

The radio model has an operational mode that is called the radio mode.
The radio mode is externally controlled usually by the MAC model. In
transceiver mode, the radio can simultaneously transmit and receive a
signal. Changing the radio mode may optionally take a non-zero amount of
time. The supported radio modes are the following:

-  *off*: communication isn’t possible, energy consumption is zero

-  *sleep*: communication isn’t possible, energy consumption is minimal

-  *receiver*: only reception is possible, energy consumption is low

-  *transmitter*: only transmission is possible, energy consumption is
   high

-  *transceiver*: reception and transmission is simultaneously possible,
   energy consumption is high

-  *switching*: communication isn’t possible, energy consumption is
   minimal

In addition to the radio mode, the transmitter and the receiver models
have separate states which describe what they are doing. Changes to
these states are automatically published by the radio. The signaled
transmitter states are the following:

-  *undefined*: not in operation

-  *idle*: no transmission in progress

-  *transmitting*: a transmission is in progress

The signaled receiver states are the following:

-  *undefined*: not in operation

-  *idle*: no reception in progress

-  *busy*: received signal is not interpretable

-  *synchronizing*: synchronization is in progress

-  *receiving*: reception is in progress

When a radio wants to transmit a signal on the medium, it sends direct
messages to all affected radios with the help of the central medium
module. The messages contain a shared data structure which describes the
transmission the way it entered the medium. The messages arrive at the
moment when start of the transmission arrive at the receiver. The
receiver radios also handle the incoming messages with the help of the
central medium module. This kind of centralization allows the medium to
do shared computations in a more efficient way and it also makes
parallel computation possible.

To maintain modularity, the radio module delegates many of is functions
to submodules. The following sections describe the parts of the radio
model.

Antenna Models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The antenna model describes the effects of the physical device which
converts electric signals into radio waves, and vice versa. This model
captures the antenna characteristics that heavily affect the quality of
the communication channel. For example, various antenna shapes, antenna
size and geometry, antenna arrays, and antenna orientation causes
different directional or frequency selectivity.

The antenna model provides a position and an orientation using a
mobility model that defaults to the mobility of the node. The main
purpose of this model is to compute the antenna gain based on the
specific antenna characteristics and the direction of the signal. The
signal direction is computed by the medium from the position and the
orientation of the transmitter and the receiver. The following list
provides some examples:

-  :ned:`IsotropicAntenna`: antenna gain is exactly 1 in any direction

-  :ned:`ConstantGainAntenna`: antenna gain is a constant determined by
   a parameter

-  :ned:`DipoleAntenna`: antenna gain depends on the direction according
   to the dipole antenna characteristics

-  :ned:`InterpolatingAntenna`: antenna gain is computed by linear
   interpolation according to a table indexed by the direction angles

The antenna models are in the ``src/physicallayer/antenna/``
directory.

Transmitter Models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The transmitter model describes the physical process which converts
packets into electric signals. In other words, this model converts a MAC
packet into a signal that is transmitted on the medium. The conversion
process and the representation of the signal depends on the level of
detail and the physical characteristics of the implemented protocol.

In the flat model the transmitter model skips the symbol domain and the
sample domain representations, and it directly creates the analog domain
representation. The bit domain representation is reduced to the bit
length of the packet and the actual bits are ignored.

In the layered model the conversion process involves various processing
steps such as packet serialization, forward error correction encoding,
scrambling, interleaving, and modulation. This transmitter model
requires much more computation, but it produces accurate bit domain,
symbol domain, and sample domain representations.

The various protocol specific transmitter models are in the
corresponding directories.

Receiver Models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The receiver model describes the physical process which converts
electric signals into packets. In other words, this model converts a
reception, along with an interference computed by the medium model, into
a MAC packet and a reception indication. It also determines the
following for each transmission:

-  *is the reception possible or not*: based on the signal
   characteristics such as reception power, carrier frequency,
   bandwidth, preamble mode, modulation scheme

-  *if the reception is possible, is reception attempted or not*: based
   on the ongoing reception and the support of signal capturing

-  *if the reception is attempted, is reception successful or not*:
   based on the error model and the simulated part of the signal
   decoding

In the flat model the receiver model skips the sample domain, the symbol
domain, and the bit domain representations, and it directly creates the
packet domain representation by copying the packet from the
transmission. It uses the error model to decide if the reception is
successful or not.

In the layered model the conversion process involves various processing
steps such as demodulation, descrambling, deinterleaving, forward error
correction decoding, and deserialization. This reception model requires
much more computation, but it produces accurate sample domain, symbol
domain, and bit domain representations.

The various protocol specific receiver models are in the corresponding
directories.

Transmission Error Modeling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Determining the reception errors is a crucial part of the reception
process. There are often several different statistical error models in
the literature even for a particular physical layer. In order to support
this diversity the error model is a separate replaceable component of
the receiver.

The error model describes how the signal to noise ratio affects the
amount of errors at the receiver. The main purpose of this model is to
determine whether if the received packet has errors or not. It also
computes various physical layer indications for higher layers such as
packet error rate, bit error rate, and symbol error rate. For the
layered reception model it needs to compute the erroneous bits, symbols,
or samples depending on the lowest simulated physical domain where the
real decoding starts. The error model is optional, if omitted all
receptions are considered successful.

The error models are in the ``src/physicallayer/errormodel/``
directory and also in the corresponding protocol specific directories.

Power Consumption Models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A substantial part of the energy consumption of communication devices
comes from transmitting and receiving signals. The energy consumer model
describes how the radio consumes energy depending on its activity. This
model is optional, if omitted energy consumption is ignored. The
following list provides some examples:

-  :ned:`StateBasedEnergyConsumer`: the constant power consumption is
   determined by valid combinations of the radio mode, the transmitter
   state and the receiver state

The energy consumer models are in the
``src/physicallayer/energyconsumer/`` directory.

TODO: layered

This module further splits the transmitter and receiver models to allow
bit precise communication modeling.

TODO: layered

The following sections describe the parts of the layered radio model.

Encoding and Decoding
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This module describes how the packet domain signal representation is
converted into the bit domain, and vice versa.

TODO: layered

Modulation and Demodulation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This module describes how the bit domain signal representation is
converted into the symbol domain, and vice versa.

TODO: layered

Pulse Shaping and Pulse Filtering
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This module describes how the symbol domain signal representation is
converted into the sample domain, and vice versa.

TODO: layered

Digital Analog and Analog Digital Conversion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This module describes how the sample domain signal representation is
converted into the analog domain, and vice versa.

TODO: layered

The Medium Model
----------------

The medium model describes the shared physical medium where
communication takes place. It keeps track of radios, noise sources,
ongoing transmissions, background noise, and other ongoing noises. The
medium computes when, where and how transmissions and noises arrive at
receivers. It also efficiently provides the set of interfering
transmissions and noises for the receivers. It doesn’t send or handle
messages on its own, it rather acts as a mediator between radios.

The medium model has a separate chapter devoted to it, see
:doc:`ch-transmission-medium`.

Signal Representation
---------------------

The data structures that represent the transmitted and the received
signals might contain many different data depending on the simulated
level of detail. In addition, the reception data structure might contain
various physical layer indications, which are computed during the
reception process. The following list provides some examples:

-  *packet domain*: actual packet, packet error rate, packet error bit,
   etc.

-  *bit domain*: various bit lengths, bitrates, actual bits, forward
   error correction code, interleaving scheme, scrambling scheme, bit
   error rate, number of bit errors, actual erroneous bits, etc.

-  *symbol domain*: number of symbols, symbol rate, actual symbols,
   modulation scheme, symbol error rate, number of symbol errors, actual
   erroneous symbols, etc.

-  *sample domain*: number of samples, sampling rate, actual samples,
   etc.

-  *analog domain*: space-time coordinates, antenna orientations,
   communication range, interference range, detection range, carrier
   frequency, subcarrier frequencies, bandwidths, scalar or dimensional
   power, receive signal strength indication, signal to noise and
   interference ratio, etc.

In simple case the packet domain specifies the MAC packet only, and the
bit domain specifies the bit length and the bitrate. The symbol domain
specifies the used modulation, and the sample domain is simply ignored.
The most important part is the analog domain representation, because it
is indispensable to be able to compute some kind of signal to noise and
interference ratio. The following figure shows four different kinds of
analog domain representations, but other representations are also
possible.



.. figure:: figures/phyanalog.*
   :align: center
   :alt: Various analog signal representations

   Various analog signal representations

The first representation is called range-based, and it is used by the
unit disc radio. The advantage of this data structure is that it is
compact, predictable, and provides high performance. The disadvantage is
that it is very inaccurate in terms of modeling reality. Nevertheless,
this representation might be sufficient for developing a new routing
protocol if accurate simulation of packet loss is not important.

The second data structure represents a narrowband signal with a scalar
signal power, a carrier frequency, and a bandwidth. The advantage of
this representation is that it allows to compute a real signal to noise
ratio, which in turn can be used by the error model to compute bit and
packet error rates. This representation is most of the time sufficient
for the simulation of IEEE 802.11 networks.

The third data structure describes a signal power that changes over
time. In this case the signal power is represented with a
one-dimensional time dependent value that precisely follows the
transmitted pulses. This representation is used by the IEEE 802.15.4a
UWB radio.

The last representation uses a multi-dimensional value to describe the
signal power that changes over both time and frequency. The IEEE 802.11b
model might use this representation to simulate crosstalk, where one
channel interferes with another. In order to make it work the frequency
spectrum of the signal has to follow the real spectrum more precisely at
both ends of the band.

The flat signal representation uses a single object to simulatenously
describe all domains of the transmission or the reception. In contrast,
the layered signal representation uses one object to describe every
domain seperately. The advantage of the latter is that it is extensible
with alternative implementations for each domain. The disadvantage is
that it needs more allocation and resource management.

Signal Processing
-----------------

The following figure shows the process of how a MAC packet gets from the
transmitter radio through the medium to the receiver radio. The figure
focues on how data flows between the processing components of the
physical layer. The blue boxes represent the data structures, and the
red boxes represent the processing components.



.. figure:: figures/phydataflow.*
   :align: center
   :alt: Signal processing data flow

   Signal processing data flow

The transmission process starts in the transmitter radio when it
receives a MAC packet from the higher layer. The radio must be in
transmitter or transceiver mode before receiving a MAC packet, otherwise
it throws an exception. At first the transmitter model creates a data
structure that describes the transmitted signal based on the received
MAC packet and the attached transmission request. The resulting data
structure is immutable, it is not going to be changed in any later
processing step.

Thereafter the propagation model computes the arrival space-time
coordinates for all receivers. In the next step the medium model
determines the set of affected receivers. Which radio constitutes
affected depends on a number of factors such as the maximum
communication range of the transmitter, the radio mode of the receiver,
the listening mode of the receiver, or potentially the MAC address of
the receiver. Using the result the medium model sends a separate message
with the shared transmission data structure to all affected receivers.
There’s no need to send a message to all radios on the channel, because
the computation of interfering signals is independent of this step.

Thereafter the attenuation model computes the reception for the receiver
using the original transmission and the arrival data structure. It
applies the path loss model, the obstacle loss model and the multipath
model to the transmission. The resulting data structure is also
immutable, it is not going to be changed in any later processing step.

Thereafter the medium model computes the interference for the reception
by collecting all interfering receptions and noises. Another signal is
considered interfering if it owerlaps both in time and frequency domains
with respect to the minimum interference parameters. The background
noise model also computes a noise signal that is added to the
interference.

The reception process starts in the receiver radio when it receives a
message from the transmitter radio. The radio must be in receiver or
transceiver mode before the message arrives, otherwise it ignores the
message. At first the receiver model determines is whether the reception
is actually attempted or not. This decision depends on the reception
power, whether there’s another ongoing reception process, and capturing
is enabled or not.

Thereafter the receiver model computes the signal to noise and
interference ratio from the reception and the interference. Using the
result, the bitrate, and the modulation scheme the error model computes
the necessary error rates. Alternatively the error model might compute
the erroneous bits, or symbols by altering the corresponding data of the
original transmission.

Thereafter the receiver determines the received MAC packet by either
simply reusing the original, or actually decoding from the lowest
represented domain in the reception. Finally, it attaches the physical
layer indication to the MAC packet, and sends it up to the higher layer.

The following sections describe the data structures that are created
during signal processing.

Transmission Request
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This data structure contains parameters that control how the transmitter
produces the transmission. For example, it might override the default
transmission power, ot the default bitrate of the transmitter. It is
attached as a control info object to the MAC packet sent down from the
MAC module to the radio.

Transmission
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This data structure describes the transmission of a signal. It specifies
the start/end time, start/end antenna position, start/end antenna
orientation of the transmitter. In other words, it describes when, where
and how the signal started/ended to interact with the medium. The
transmitter model creates one transmission instance per MAC packet.

Arrival
~~~~~~~

This data structure decscirbes the space and time coordinates of a
transmission arriving at a particular receiver. It specifies the
start/end time, start/end antenna position, start/end antenna
orientation of the receiver. The propagation model creates one arrival
instance per transmission per receiver.

Listening
~~~~~~~~~

This data structure describes the way the receiver radio is listening on
the medium. The physical layer ignores certain transmissions either
during computing the interference or even the complete reception of such
transmissions. For example, a narrowband listening specifies a carrier
frequency and a bandwidth.

Reception
~~~~~~~~~

This data structure describes the reception of a signal by a particular
receiver. It specifies at least the start/end time, start/end antenna
position, start/end antenna orientation of the receiver. The attenuation
model creates one reception instance per transmission per receiver.

Noise
~~~~~

This data structure describes a meaningless signal or a meaningless
composition of multiple signals. All models contain at least the
start/end time, and start/end position.

Interference
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This data structure describes the interfering signals and noises that
affect a particular reception. It also specifies the total noise that is
the composition of all interference.

SNIR
~~~~

This data structure describes the signal to noise and interference ratio
of a particular reception. It also specifies the minimum signal to noise
and interference ratio.

Reception Decision
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This data structure describes whether if the reception of a signal is
possible or not, is attempted or not, and is successful or not.

Reception Indication
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This data structure describes the physical layer indications such as
RSSI, SNIR, PER, BER, SER. These physical properties are optional and
may be omitted if the receiver is configured to do so or if it doesn’t
support providing the data. The reception indication is attached as a
control info object to the MAC packet sent up from the radio to the MAC
module.

Visualization
-------------

In order to help understanding the communication in the network the
physical layer supports visualizing its state. The following list shows
what can be displayed:

-  ongoing transmissions

-  recent successful receptions

-  recent obstacle intersections and surface normal vectors

The ongoing transmissions can be displayed with 3 dimensional spheres or
with 2 dimensional rings laying in the XY plane. As the signal
propagates through space the figure grows with it to show where the
beginning of the signal is. The inner circle of the ring figure shows as
the end of the signal propagates through space.

The recent successful receptions are displayed as straight lines between
the original positions of the transmission and the reception. The recent
obstacle intersections are also displayed as straight lines from the
start of the intersection to the end of it.

TODO other stuff
----------------

TODO: scalar vs dimensional

TODO: flat vs layered

TODO: Generic, IEEE 802.11, IEEE 802.15.4

TODO: acoustic underwater example

TODO: wireless vs. wired medium

Use Cases
---------
