
## Release checklist

- Update `WHATSNEW`. (This is not necessary for patch releases though an URL to the milestone on github is a good idea.)
- Check if all fixed issues are correctly assigned to the milestone for this version 
- Update the version in `common/INETDefs.h`
- Run `releng/update-changelogs`. Edit and commit the result.
- Run `releng/tag-changelogs`, commit the result.
- If new NED types were added to INET, update the `doc/src/msgtags.xml` and `doc/src/nedtags.xml` files (these are part of the repo so they should be checked in). These files can be generated by running the NED Doc generator from the IDE.
- If new functionality was added, `tests/fingerprint/SelfDoc.json` must be updated by running `tests/fingerprint/fingerprinttest_selfdoc`. The `SelfDoc.json` file is part of the repo so it should be checked in.
- Run the `./releng/makedist` script. (Note that the directory name in the tarball should be only `inet<major>.<minor>`, without the patch level.)
- Rename the resulting archive file and remove the githash from the filename.
- Create a new release on GitHub, upload the release tarball.
- Add the new release to XML descriptors in the `models.omnetpp.org` [repository](https://github.com/omnetpp/models.omnetpp.org).
- Update `opp_env` with the new release and optionally create a new version of `opp_env` by adding a new versionbtag on the main branch.
- Update Downloads page on the INET website
- Add news item on the front page of the INET website
- Major/Minor releases (x.y) should be announced on the main omnetpp.org site, too.
- Write an announcement email to the mailing list and on https://forum.omnetpp.org in the announcement section.