Step 3. Automatically assigning IP addresses to a subnet from a given range
===========================================================================

Goals
-----

Complex networks often contain several subnetworks, and the user may
want to assign specific IP address ranges to them. This step
demonstrates how to assign a range of IP addresses to subnets.

The model
---------

This step uses the :ned:`ConfiguratorA` network, as in the previous two
steps. One switch and the connected hosts as a group will be on the same
subnet, and there are three such groups in the network.

The configuration is as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../omnetpp.ini
   :language: ini
   :start-at: Step3
   :end-before: ####

This time the XML configuration is supplied in an external file
(step3.xml), using the ``xmldoc()`` function:

.. literalinclude:: ../step3.xml
   :language: xml

A brief explanation:

-  The first three entries assign IP addresses with different network
   prefixes to hosts in the three different subnets.

-  The next three entries specify, for each router, that its interface
   connecting to a subnet should belong to that subnet. These entries
   use the ``towards`` selector, which selects the interfaces that are
   connected towards the specified host or hosts.

-  The last entry sets the network prefix of interfaces of all routers
   to be 10.1.x.x. The routers' interfaces facing the subnets were
   assigned addresses by the previous rules, so this rule only affects
   the interfaces facing the other routers.

These seven rules assign addresses to all interfaces in the network,
thus, a default rule is not required.

Variations
~~~~~~~~~~

The same effect can be achieved in more than one way. Here is an
alternative XML configuration (step3alt1.xml) that results in the same
address assignment:

.. literalinclude:: ../step3alt1.xml
   :language: xml

The ``among`` selector selects the interfaces of the specified hosts
towards the specified hosts (the statement ``among="X Y Z"`` is the same
as ``hosts="X Y Z" towards="X Y Z"``).

Another alternative XML configuration is the following:

.. literalinclude:: ../step3alt2.xml
   :language: xml

This one assigns an address to one host in each of the three subnets. It
assigns addresses to the interfaces of the routers facing the other
routers, and includes a copy of the default configuration. Because
``assignDisjunctSubnetAddresses=true``, the configurator puts the
unspecified hosts and the subnet-facing router interfaces into the same
subnet as the specified host.

Results
-------

The assigned addresses are shown in the following image.

.. figure:: media/step3address.png
   :width: 100%

The addresses are assigned as intended. This is useful because it is
easy to recognize which group a node belongs to just by looking at its
address (e.g., in the logs).

Sources: :download:`omnetpp.ini <../omnetpp.ini>`,
:download:`ConfiguratorA.ned <../ConfiguratorA.ned>`

Discussion
----------

Use `this
page <https://github.com/inet-framework/inet-tutorials/issues/2>`__ in
the GitHub issue tracker for commenting on this tutorial.
