Step 8. Configuring a mixed wired/wireless network
==================================================

Goals
-----

This step demonstrates routing table configuration in a mixed
wired/wireless network. This step consists of two parts:

-  **Part A**: Determining members of wireless networks with the
   ``<wireless>`` element
-  **Part B**: Determining members of wireless networks by SSID

Part A: Using the <wireless> element
------------------------------------

The configurator assumes that interfaces of wireless nodes in the same
wireless network can reach each other directly. It can determine which
nodes belong to a wireless network in two ways:

-  It looks at the ``defaultSsid`` parameter in nodes' agent submodule.
   Nodes with the same SSID are assumed to be in the same wireless
   network.
-  Members of wireless networks can be specified by the ``<wireless>``
   element in the XML configuration. In the ``<wireless>`` element, the
   ``hosts`` and ``interfaces`` selector attributes can be used to
   specify members.

Note that nodes need to use the same radio medium module to be in the
same wireless network.

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This step uses the :ned:`ConfiguratorC` network defined in
:download:`ConfiguratorC.ned <../ConfiguratorC.ned>`. The network is
displayed on the following image.

.. figure:: media/step8network.png
   :width: 100%

The :ned:`ConfiguratorC` network extends :ned:`ConfiguratorB` by adding two
wireless LANs, ``area1lan3`` and ``area3lan3``. The additional LANs
consist of an :ned:`AccessPoint` and three ``WirelessHosts``.

The default SSID setting of all wireless nodes is ``"SSID"``. By
default, the configurator would put them in the same wireless network,
and assume that they can all reach each other directly. This would be
reflected in the routes, hosts in ``area1lan3`` would reach hosts in
``area3lan3`` directly. This is obviously wrong because they are out of
range of each other. The two LANs need to be in two different wireless
networks.

Here is the configuration for this step in omnetpp.ini:

.. literalinclude:: ../omnetpp.ini
   :language: ini
   :start-at: Step8
   :end-before: ####

A wireless host in area 1 is configured to ping a wireless host in area
3, which helps in visualizing routes.

There is a setting in the ``General`` configuration pertaining to
wireless networks: the control bit rate of all wireless nodes is set to
54 Mbps for faster ACK transmissions.

.. literalinclude:: ../omnetpp.ini
   :language: ini
   :start-at: General
   :end-before: ####

The XML configuration in step8a.xml is the following:

.. literalinclude:: ../step8a.xml
   :language: xml

The XML configuration uses the same hierarchical addressing scheme as in
Step 7. The two wireless LANs are specified to be in separate wireless
networks. Note that the wireless interfaces of the access points also
belong to the wireless networks.

Results
~~~~~~~

The addresses and routes are indicated in the following image. Routes
leading towards hosts ``area3lan3`` are visualized.

.. figure:: media/step8a_2.png
   :width: 100%

Wireless hosts connect to the router through the access points. The
access points are L2 devices, similar to switches, so they are
transparent for the routing table visualizer arrows. Wireless hosts get
associated with their corresponding access points before they can
communicate with the rest of the network.

On the following video, ``area1lan3host2`` pings ``area3lan3host2``.
Transmissions are sent to all wireless nodes, but only those in
communication range can receive them correctly (i.e. nodes in the same
LAN).

.. video:: media/Step8A_1_cropped.mp4
   :width: 100%

   <!--internal video recording playback speed 2 animation speed none crop 210 360 50 30-->

The following image shows how the routes would look like if the XML configuration didn't
contain the ``<wireless>`` elements:

.. figure:: media/step8fullmesh_2.png
   :width: 100%

There are no routes visualized between the ``backbonerouter`` and
``area3router``, because routes towards ``area3lan3`` go via
``area1router``. ``Area3lan3`` can be reached from the
``backbonerouter`` in two ways:

-  ``area1router`` → ``area1AP`` → ``area3lan3`` (``area1AP`` reaches
   ``area3lan3`` directly since they are assumed to be in the same
   wireless network)
-  ``area3router`` → ``area3AP`` → ``area3lan3``

In both ways, ``area3lan3`` is two hops away from the
``backbonerouter``. Routes are configured according to hop count, and
the configurator chose the first way.

Part B - Using SSID
-------------------

In this part, the SSID is used to put the two wireless LANs in two
different wireless networks.

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The configuration for this part extends Part A. The configuration in
omnetpp.ini is the following:

.. literalinclude:: ../omnetpp.ini
   :language: ini
   :start-at: Step8B
   :end-before: ####

The XML configuration in step8b.xml (displayed below) is the same as the
XML configuration for Part A, except there are no ``<wireless>``
elements that defined wireless networks. They are not needed because
different SSIDs are configured for the members of the two wireless LANs.

.. literalinclude:: ../step8b.xml
   :language: xml

Results
~~~~~~~

The results are the same as in the previous part. The two wireless LANs
are considered to be different wireless networks.

Sources: :download:`omnetpp.ini <../omnetpp.ini>`,
:download:`ConfiguratorC.ned <../ConfiguratorC.ned>`

Discussion
----------

Use `this
page <https://github.com/inet-framework/inet/discussions/999>`__ in
the GitHub issue tracker for commenting on this tutorial.
