Step 9. Leaving some part of the network unconfigured
=====================================================

Goals
-----

Configuring the whole network is not always desirable, because some parts
of the network should rather be configured dynamically. In this step,
some wired and wireless LANs' addresses are left unspecified by the
configurator, and they get addresses with DHCP.

The model
---------

This step uses the :ned:`ConfiguratorC` network, defined in
:download:`ConfiguratorC.ned <../ConfiguratorC.ned>`.

.. figure:: media/step8network.png
   :width: 100%

The configuration for this step in omnetpp.ini is the following:

.. literalinclude:: ../omnetpp.ini
   :language: ini
   :start-at: Step9
   :end-before: ####

It boils down to the following:

-  Similarly to Step 8B, members of the two wireless LANs are specified
   by SSID.
-  ``Area1lan3host2`` is configured to ping ``area3lan3host3``. The ping
   application is delayed, so it starts sending pings after the hosts
   associated with the access points and got their addresses from the
   DHCP servers.
-  :ned:`DhcpServer` submodules are added to the area routers. The DHCP
   server is configured to listen on the interface connecting to the
   unspecified LAN. The interface's netmask is the DHCP server's address
   range.
-  :ned:`DhcpClient` submodules are added to the LANs which are unspecified
   by the configurator. There is one such LAN in each area; they are
   ``area1lan3``, ``area2lan1`` and ``area3lan3``. Hosts in these LANs
   get the addresses from the DHCP server in the corresponding area
   router.
-  Routes to ``area3lan3host3`` are visualized.

The XML configuration in step9.xml is the following:

.. literalinclude:: ../step9.xml
   :language: xml

Addresses are assigned hierarchically. Five LANs in the network have
addresses assigned by the configurator. Three LANs get their addresses
from DHCP servers, their interfaces are left unspecified by the
configurator. This is accomplished by the lack of address assignment
rules for these hosts in the XML configuration. The area routers'
interfaces connecting to the latter LANs need to be specified in order
to have correct routes to these LANs. Additionally, the addresses for
these interfaces need to be assigned specifically, and they have to fall
in the configured DHCP server address ranges.

Results
-------

The addresses and routes are visualized below. The state of the network
at the start of the simulation is shown on the following image:

.. figure:: media/step9routes_2.png
   :width: 100%

The hosts of ``area1lan3``, ``area2lan1``, and ``area3lan3`` have
unspecified addresses. The routing tables of all hosts contain subnet
routes to these three LANs. Since these hosts don't have addresses at
the start of the simulation, there are no routes leading to
``area3lan3host2`` that can be visualized.

Though the hosts in the three LANs have unspecified addresses, subnet
routes leading to these LANs are added to the routing tables of all
hosts. The addresses for the interfaces connecting to these LANs have a
netmask assigned, so there are addresses allocated for the unspecified
hosts. For example, ``area1router``'s ``eth3`` interface has the address
10.1.4.1/29 and has four addresses allocated (``10.1.4.2``..\ ``5``).

The routing tables of ``area1lan3host2``, ``area1router`` and
``backbonerouter`` are the following (routes for reaching the
unspecified hosts are highlighted):

.. code-block:: none
   :emphasize-lines: 4,5,13,14,22,23

   Node ConfiguratorC.area1lan3host2
   -- Routing table --
   Destination      Netmask          Gateway          Iface            Metric
   10.1.3.0         255.255.255.248  *                wlan0 (unspec)        0
   *                *                10.1.3.1         wlan0 (unspec)        0

   Node ConfiguratorC.area1router
   -- Routing table --
   Destination      Netmask          Gateway          Iface            Metric
   10.1.0.1         255.255.255.255  *                eth2 (10.1.0.2)       0
   10.1.1.0         255.255.255.248  *                eth0 (10.1.1.4)       0
   10.1.2.0         255.255.255.248  *                eth1 (10.1.2.4)       0
   10.1.3.0         255.255.255.248  *                eth3 (10.1.3.1)       0
   10.2.0.0         255.254.0.0      10.1.0.1         eth2 (10.1.0.2)       0

   Node ConfiguratorC.backbonerouter
   -- Routing table --
   Destination      Netmask          Gateway          Iface            Metric
   10.1.0.2         255.255.255.255  *                eth1 (10.1.0.1)       0
   10.2.0.2         255.255.255.255  *                eth0 (10.2.0.1)       0
   10.3.0.2         255.255.255.255  *                eth2 (10.3.0.1)       0
   10.1.0.0         255.255.252.0    10.1.0.2         eth1 (10.1.0.1)       0
   10.2.0.0         255.255.252.0    10.2.0.2         eth0 (10.2.0.1)       0
   10.3.0.0         255.255.252.0    10.3.0.2         eth2 (10.3.0.1)       0

.. note::

   -  ``area1lan3host2`` has a default route for reaching the other hosts
      in the LAN.
   -  ``area1Router`` has a route for reaching hosts in ``area1lan3``, and
      a default route for reaching area 2 and area 3.
   -  ``backbonerouter`` has subnet routes to each area.

In the following video, ``area1lan3host2`` sends a ping packet to
``area3lan3host2``:

.. video:: media/Step9_2.mp4
   :width: 100%

No routes are visualized initially because ``area3lan3host2`` (the
destination of route visualization) has an unspecified IP address. When
it gets an address from the DHCP server, the routes leading towards
``area3lan3host2`` appear.

Sources: :download:`omnetpp.ini <../omnetpp.ini>`,
:download:`ConfiguratorC.ned <../ConfiguratorC.ned>`

Discussion
----------

Use `this page <https://github.com/inet-framework/inet/discussions/999>`__ in
the GitHub issue tracker for commenting on this tutorial.
