# INET Applications NED Documentation Review Progress

This file tracks the progress of reviewing and improving NED documentation for files in src/inet/applications.

## Status Legend
- todo: File needs documentation review and improvement
- reviewed: File has been reviewed but not yet improved
- improved: File documentation has been improved

## Files Status

### Clock Applications
src/inet/applications/clock/SimpleClockSynchronizer.ned: improved

### Common Applications
src/inet/applications/common/SinkApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/common/SourceApp.ned: improved

### Contract Interfaces
src/inet/applications/contract/IApp.ned: improved

### DHCP Applications
src/inet/applications/dhcp/DhcpClient.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/dhcp/DhcpServer.ned: improved

### Ethernet Applications
src/inet/applications/ethernet/EtherAppClient.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ethernet/EtherAppServer.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ethernet/EthernetApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ethernet/EthernetSinkApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ethernet/EthernetSocketIo.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ethernet/EthernetSourceApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ethernet/EtherTrafGen.ned: improved

### External Applications
src/inet/applications/external/ExternalApp.ned: improved

### Generic Applications
src/inet/applications/generic/IIpvxTrafficGenerator.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/generic/IpvxTrafGen.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/generic/IpvxTrafSink.ned: improved

### IEEE 802.2 Applications
src/inet/applications/ieee8022/Ieee8022LlcApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ieee8022/Ieee8022LlcSinkApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ieee8022/Ieee8022LlcSocketIo.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ieee8022/Ieee8022LlcSourceApp.ned: improved

### IP Applications
src/inet/applications/ipapp/IpApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ipapp/IpSinkApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ipapp/IpSocketIo.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/ipapp/IpSourceApp.ned: improved

### NetPerfMeter Applications
src/inet/applications/netperfmeter/NetPerfMeter.ned: improved

### Ping Applications
src/inet/applications/pingapp/PingApp.ned: improved

### RTP Applications
src/inet/applications/rtpapp/RtpApplication.ned: improved

### SCTP Applications
src/inet/applications/sctpapp/SctpClient.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/sctpapp/SctpNatPeer.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/sctpapp/SctpNatServer.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/sctpapp/SctpPeer.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/sctpapp/SctpServer.ned: improved

### TCP Applications
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpBasicClientApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpClientApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpClientSocketIo.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpEchoApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpGenericServerApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpRequestResponseApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpServerApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpServerConnection.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpServerHostApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpServerListener.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpServerSocketIo.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpSessionApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TcpSinkApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TelnetApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TelnetClientApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TelnetServerApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tcpapp/TelnetServerConnection.ned: improved

### TUN Applications
src/inet/applications/tunapp/TunLoopbackApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/tunapp/TunnelApp.ned: improved

### UDP Applications
src/inet/applications/udpapp/UdpApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/udpapp/UdpBasicApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/udpapp/UdpBasicBurst.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/udpapp/UdpEchoApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/udpapp/UdpRequestResponseApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/udpapp/UdpSinkApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/udpapp/UdpSink.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/udpapp/UdpSocketIo.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/udpapp/UdpSourceApp.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/udpapp/UdpVideoStreamClient.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/udpapp/UdpVideoStreamServer.ned: improved

### VoIP Applications
src/inet/applications/voip/SimpleVoipReceiver.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/voip/SimpleVoipSender.ned: improved

### VoIP Stream Applications
src/inet/applications/voipstream/VoipStreamReceiver.ned: improved
src/inet/applications/voipstream/VoipStreamSender.ned: improved
